Source PDF: 1-s2.0-S0006349505727430-main.pdf
Extracted text file: Selmeczi_2005.txt

912

Biophysical Journal

Volume 89

August 2005

912–931

Cell Motility as Persistent Random Motion: Theories from Experiments
David Selmeczi,*y Stephan Mosler,* Peter H. Hagedorn,z Niels B. Larsen,*z and Henrik Flyvbjerg*z§
*Danish Polymer Centre, and zBiosystems Department, Risø National Laboratory, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark; yDepartment of Biological
Physics, Eötvös Loránd University (ELTE), H-1117 Budapest, Hungary; and §Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge,
United Kingdom

ABSTRACT Experimental time series for trajectories of motile cells may contain so much information that a systematic
analysis will yield cell-type-speciﬁc motility models. Here we demonstrate how, using human keratinocytes and ﬁbroblasts as
examples. The two resulting models reﬂect the cells’ different roles in the organism, it seems, and show that a cell has a memory
of past velocities. They also suggest how to distinguish quantitatively between various surfaces’ compatibility with the two cell
types.

INTRODUCTION
Cell migration is essential in many physiological and
pathological processes, e.g., embryogenesis, wound healing,
inﬂammation, and metastasis. It is also essential to emerging
medical technologies that rely on colonization of biomaterials by migrating cells (1–6). Many cellular signaling
pathways that regulate migration have been described in
recent years (7). The mechano-chemistry of migration is also
studied and modeled in subtle detail (8–11). Less is known
about the migratory pattern that results from a cell’s
processing of all external stimuli. Although motility models
for bacteria have evolved to sophistication (12–15), phenomenological mathematical models for cells from higher
organisms have, with few exceptions (16), remained simple.
The Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process (17), an old model
inspired by Brownian motion, remains the standard reference, and Fürth’s formula (18)

explain. The models are cell-type speciﬁc since the same
model describes one cell type on different surfaces. Differences in the motility pattern of a given cell type on different
surfaces are reﬂected in different values for model parameters.
Consequently, these parameter values are quantitative celland-surface compatibility measures.
Our phenomenological approach to motility modeling is
general, and may characterize other motility patterns as well.
Models that result from this phenomenological approach,
including ours, are natural targets for explanations in terms
of biological processes.

~ðtÞ2 æ ¼ 2nDðt  Pð1  et=P ÞÞ;
Æd

Collagen I was acid-extracted from fetal bovine dermis and puriﬁed by
a special sequence of differential salt precipitations (24). Coverslip glass
was ultrasonicated in ethanol and water and dried in a clean bench.
Molecular collagen-coated glasses resulted from adsorption from collagen I
stem solution to the glass surface throughout 1 h at ambient conditions with
100% humidity, followed by thorough washing and drying. Fibrillar
collagen-coated glass was fabricated by ﬁbril reassembly of puriﬁed
collagen I in a thin neutral buffer layer on the glass and its sedimentation
at a density of 30 ng/mm2, followed by thorough washing and drying (24).
Tissue culture grade polystyrene, TCPS (Nunclon Delta, Nunc, Denmark),
was used for cell line propagation and experiments.

(1)

for the mean square of a motile organism’s displacement
~
dðtÞ ¼ ~ðtÞ
r  ~ð0Þ
r
has remained a standard with which
experimental data are analyzed; see, e.g., Gail and Boone
and others (19–23). Here Æ. . .æ denotes expectation value, t is
time, and n ¼ 1, 2, or 3 is the dimension of the space in which
trajectories ~ðtÞ
r are studied. D is the diffusion coefﬁcient of
the OU process, and is referred to as the motility coefﬁcient
of the microorganism, and is sometimes written m. P is the
persistence time of the motion, and the notation b ¼ P1 is
often seen.
There is nothing as practical as a correct theory, so one
should be conservative about well-proven formulas. However, we show below that human ﬁbroblasts and keratinocytes
move in a manner that rejects Fürth’s formula and most other
characteristic properties of the OU process. The data point
clearly to new, cell-type-speciﬁc models, which we solve and

Submitted February 14, 2005, and accepted for publication May 12, 2005.
Address reprint requests to Henrik Flyvbjerg, E-mail: henrik.ﬂyvbjerg@
risoe.dk.
 2005 by the Biophysical Society
0006-3495/05/08/912/20 $2.00

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture substrata

Cell culture
HaCaT cells, a monolayer-forming transformed human keratinocyte line
(German Cancer Research Center, DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany), were
cultured in DMEM/Nut Mix F-12 (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with
10% fetal calf serum (Gibco) and 4 mM glutamine. NHDF cells, normal
human dermal ﬁbroblasts (Clonetics, San Diego, CA), were cultured in
ﬁbroblast basal medium (Clonetics) supplemented with 2% fetal calf serum
(Clonetics) and ﬁbroblast growth factor (Clonetics). Both cell lines were
incubated at 37C and 7% CO2. Before experiments with either cell type,
the cells were dissociated by trypsin/EDTA (Gibco). The medium was
changed to CO2-independent medium (Gibco) with the same supplementation. Some 5000 cells/(cm2 substratum) were seeded and incubated at
37C. The motility data presented and analyzed below were obtained
from HaCaT cells on substrata of molecular collagen and substrata of
doi: 10.1529/biophysj.105.061150

Cell Motility as Persistent Random Motion

913

ﬁbrillar collagen, and from NHDF cells on the same two collagen substrata,
as well as on glass and on TCPS, all at 37C. HaCaT cells did not show
measurable motility on glass and TCPS during the ﬁrst 24 h of the experiment.

Monitoring of cell migration
A microscope stage was converted to a temperature-controlled incubation
chamber with a computer-controlled step motor for parallel monitoring of
several sites and samples under equal conditions. Cells were monitored in an
inverted phase contrast microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 100 M, Zena, Germany)
with autofocusing controlled by dedicated software. A digital camera
(Olympus C-3040Zoom, Tokyo, Japan) recorded time-lapse movies with
intervals Dt of 15 min for 24 h. Fig. 1 shows subsets of two frames from two
movies, with cells marked.

Generation of trajectories
Only vital cells with full spreading on the substratum and long presence in
the view ﬁeld were selected from recorded image sequences. To ensure long
presence, cells were excluded from the statistics if they started their
trajectories within a 30-pixel-wide band around the edge of the 1024 3 768
pixels large view ﬁeld. One pixel width corresponded to 0.85 mm in images
of HaCaT cells, and 1.7 mm in images of NHDF cells.
One pixel in each cell nucleus was marked manually as the cell’s
coordinate. Because cells are located at random relatively to the grid of
pixels with which they are viewed, the true position of a cell’s center can be
located anywhere inside the pixel used to mark it. Because we use the
coordinates of the center of that square pixel instead of the unknown true
coordinates of the cell’s center, the coordinates that we use contain round-off
errors. These errors come in all sizes between 61/2 pixel width, with the
same probability for all sizes. Hence the root-mean-square
deviation
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
(RMSD) of the round-off error distribution is 1= 12 pixel width on the
x-coordinate, and the same value on the y-coordinate.
Cell populations were dilute, so direct interactions between motile cells
were rare. When they occurred, both cells’ trajectories were excluded from
the statistics. Cell trajectories crossing each other were less rare. No effect
of this could be discerned. Data for cell coordinates were corrected for
drift, and single cell trajectories were calculated from position and time data.
A number of cells had to be removed from the statistics because they did
not move. Visual inspection of trajectories would reveal nonmoving cells.
From a number of such inspections, it was found that they could be excluded automatically, by excluding cells with a root-mean-square displacement that never exceeded 15 mm in the case of HaCaT cells and 20 mm in
the case of NHDF cells. Fig. 2 shows examples of trajectories that were
included in the statistics.

Data analysis
For each cell trajectory ~ðtÞ;
r
the positions ~
rj ¼ ~ðt
r j Þ; tj ¼ jDt, j ¼ 1, 2, 3, . . .
~j  ~
rj1 Þ=Dt were calculated. From
were recorded, and the velocities ~
vj ¼ ðr
~j11  ~
vj Þ=Dt were formed. Since
these velocities, the accelerations ~
aj ¼ ðv
surfaces were manufactured to be homogenous and isotropic to cells, and the
cells’ environment was kept constant in time, we tested and found velocity
distributions consistent with spatial homogeneity and isotropy, as well as
with temporal invariance; see Fig. 3. Consequently, when computing any
ensemble average, we also averaged this quantity over time, space, and direction to improve statistics. Data were then plotted, analyzed, and modeled as
described in the following sections and Appendix B.

Deriving motility models from experimental data
See Appendix A.

FIGURE 1 Snapshots of cells with markers. The markers shown are much
larger than the one pixel in the center of a cell’s nucleus that is used to denote
the position of a cell and on which the marker is centered. Nonmoving cells
and cells interfering with each other’s trajectories were excluded from the
statistics. Length bars measure 200 mm. (Top) HaCaT cells on substrate of
molecular collagen. On glass and TCPS they are round in shape. Here they
spread out and sometimes show an asymmetric migratory shape. (Bottom)
NHDF cells on TCPS. On collagen surfaces they are elongated, whereas on
TCPS, and especially on glass, they show a ‘‘classical migratory shape’’
with lamellipodia, rifﬂing membrane, etc.

FÜRTH’S FORMULA AND THE
ORNSTEIN-UHLENBECK PROCESS
Developed for protozoa in 1920, Fürth’s formula has been
used on motile cells since 1970 (19). Its agreement with data
can be impressive (25) and is mostly satisfactory. This
agreement is sometimes due to sizable experimental errors,
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

914

Selmeczi et al.

pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
~
dv
~1 2D ~
¼ v
h;
(3)
dt
where ~
h is a normalized ‘‘white noise’’; see Appendix A.
~Þ;
The OU model’s steady-state distribution of velocities, pðv
is a simple Gaussian. This property conﬂicts with some
experimental results (27–29). Some authors have observed
that other distributions—an exponential (27) and Tsallis’
distribution (28,29)—ﬁt their velocity data better. Other
authors have formulated new models with plausible details,
but only in the form of computer algorithms. Our data are
rich enough to allow a more radical approach. We let the data
speak for themselves, as follows.
P

READING DATA

FIGURE 2 Collections of typical cell trajectories of the kind the ensuing
analysis is based on. Each trajectory has been displaced so that the ensemble
of starting points form a square lattice with a lattice spacing chosen large
enough to prevent intersection of trajectories. The length of the two black
bars shown is 200 mm. (A) HaCaT cells. (B) NHDF cells.

or to slow data sampling rate compared to P. Data sets with
one or both of these properties cannot distinguish Eq. 1 from
other functions of time that quickly approach a ﬁrst-degree
polynomial. The model-speciﬁc content of Eq. 1 is more
obvious in the velocity autocorrelation function that Eq. 1
corresponds to,
nD jtj=P
e
;
(2)
P
~=dt: Equation 1 follows from Eq. 2, and vice
where ~
v [ dr
versa, by integrating, respectively differentiating, twice.
These equations do not deﬁne a speciﬁc motility model,
however. A whole class of models have the property f(t) }
exp(jtj/P).
The Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (17,26) is maybe the
simplest such model for persistent random motion of motile
cells, and a popular one. It is deﬁned by the equation
~ðtÞ  ~ð0Þæ
fðtÞ [ Æv
v
¼

Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

~Þ; for dv
~=dt as function
Experimental results for f(t), for pðv
of ~;
v and for the noise term } ~
h; all reveal the shortcomings
of the OU model, we shall see. But the same experimental
results yield its substitute: Eq. 3 states that a cell’s accel~=dt at any time t is a random vector with expeceration dv
~ðtÞ=P; and with equal RMSD in all directions.
tation value v
This statement can be compared with experimental data in
a straightforward and model-independent manner: Fig. 4 A
shows experimentally measured accelerations of HaCaT
cells plotted against their instantaneous speed. If these data
can be described by Eq. 3, Fig. 4 A1 accelerations parallel
to the velocity should average locally, as function of the
speed v, to v/P, with P a parameter to be ﬁtted. The red
data in Fig. 4 B show that they do.
Also, Fig. 4 A2 accelerations orthogonal to the velocity
should average to 0 locally, for all values of v. The green data
in Fig. 4 B show that they do.
Furthermore, the accelerations in Fig. 4 A should scatter
about
these averages with the same v-independent RMSD,
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2D=Dt=P according to the OU model. Here Dt ¼ 15 min
is the time lapse between successive position measurements
~
rj from which velocities and accelerations were calculated;
see Appendix A. The blue and magenta data in Fig. 4 B show
the RMSD of each component of the accelerations. Within
their error bars, the two RMSDs are identical. But they
depend on the speed v, essentially as a ﬁrst-degree polynomial, in disagreement with the OU model.
Finally, the accelerations in Fig. 4 A should be Gaussian
distributed about their averages and uncorrelated, according
to the OU model. Fig. 4 C shows clearly that they are not
Gaussian distributed. Both are more similar to two exponential distributions placed back-to-back. This is not just due
to time-lapse recording, i.e., a discretization effect due to
Dt ¼ 15 min. One can prove that the OU process gives a
purely Gaussian distribution when studied with any ﬁnite
value for Dt.
Fig. 4 C was produced as follows: each component of
~j æ at given ~
~
vj ; parallel, respectively orthogonal to
aj  Æa
~
vj ; was measured in units of its speed-dependent RMSD
shown in Fig. 4 B. The distribution of each of these reduced,

Cell Motility as Persistent Random Motion

915

FIGURE 3 Experimental demonstration
of spatial homogeneity, isotropy, and
temporal invariance of cells’ environment,
expressed through the cells’ pattern of
motion. HaCaT (left) and NHDF (right)
cells. (A panels) Distributions of observed
speeds of HaCaT/NHDF cells on six/four
different parts of the surface. The six/four
distributions do not differ, apart from
ﬂuctuation due to ﬁnite statistics. (B panels)
Six columns show the number of cells that
moved in each of six different directions
relative to their starting point. Directions
are 60 intervals adding up to 360. Total
population of HaCaT/NHDF cells was 100/
52. Three horizontal lines show theoretical
expectation value and standard deviation
for numbers shown as columns. The
distribution on directions is consistent
with isotropy. (C panels) Population-averaged speed as function of time. The
population average is constant in time, up
to stochastic ﬂuctuations due to ﬁnite population size. Thick horizontal line is population- and time-averaged speed. Two thin
horizontal lines are theoretical RMSD of
population-averaged speed according to
model presented below. The population
inside the ﬁeld of view is constant during
the experiment, apart from a small decrease
at the very end of the period of observation.
This small decrease is seen in the theoretical RMSD, which increases correspondingly, as (population size)1/2.

dimensionless components was ﬁrst measured as function
of speed. Within ﬂuctuations due to ﬁnite statistics, both
distributions were found independent of speed, except at the
lowest speeds. So we compounded data obtained at all
speeds larger than half the mean speed. Fig. 4 C shows the
resulting distributions.
Fig. 4 D shows our experimental results for the normalized autocorrelation function for the two components of
~j æ: It is a Kronecker d-function, i.e., there are no cor~
aj  Æa
relations, except for a small positive correlation in Fig. 4 D1.
By neglecting the latter in a ﬁrst attempt to ﬁnd a model, we
can achieve simplicity in that model-to-be.
Fig. 4 C looks discouraging since its non-Gaussian
distributions seem to require a model with correlated, nonGaussian noise. This turns out to be wrong: the speeddependent noise amplitude combines with the 15-min
discretization of data in a manner that allows a model with
uncorrelated Gaussian noise to perfectly reproduce the nonGaussian experimental noise in Fig. 4 C! Even the small
positive correlation in Fig. 4 D1 turns out to be explained by
the model we arrive at below.
Fig. 4 E shows that the velocity autocorrelation function
for HaCaT cells is not a simple exponential function, as it is

in the OU process. On the contrary, the data are ﬁtted perfectly by a sum of two exponentials.
~Þ as a
Fig. 4 F shows our experimental result for pðv
histogram of observed velocities, binned on the v axis in
panel F1, and binned on the v2 axis in panel F2, both with
logarithmic second axis. Isotropy of the surface on which
~Þ depend only on the speed v,
the cells crawled, makes pðv
and not on the direction of the velocity. Consequently, if
~Þ is a Gaussian distribution on the ~-plane,
pðv
v
as in the OU
model, its graph is a straight line in panel F2. This is clearly
not the case, according to the histogram of observed velocities.
If, on the other hand, speeds are exponentially distributed
on the v axis, as suggested in Czirók et al. (27), the graph of
that distribution is a straight line in panel F1. This is also not
the case according to the histogram of observed velocities,
though it could pass as an approximation away from zero
velocity. If it were an exponential distribution also down to
/
~Þ would not be analytical in ~
zero velocity, pðv
v ¼ 0 ; but
diverge like 1/v. Such singular behavior cannot be excluded à
~Þ must result from a dynamical theory of
priori. But pðv
motility. And that results in a distribution that describes data
much better, we shall ﬁnd.
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

916

Selmeczi et al.

FIGURE 4 Motility of HaCaT cells. (A) Experimentally measured components of acceleration parallel (A1) and perpendicular (A2) to the cell’s velocity,
plotted against the cell’s speed. The striped pattern in the scatter is due to ﬁnite resolution of positions, hence of speeds, caused by ﬁnite width of pixels. (B) Red
and green data points are the mean values of the acceleration’s two components shown in panels A1 and A2, respectively, as functions of speed. Blue/magenta
data points show RMSD of same quantities, parallel/orthogonal component. Thick curves show theoretical expectation values of same quantities, according to
the HaCaT model, Eq. 6, ﬁtted to data in panels B, E, and F1 simultaneously. Pairs of thin lines next to thick curves show 6 1 SD from thick curve, according to
HaCaT model’s prediction of experimental data points’ scatter. (C panels) Distribution of acceleration about its mean value, in units of distribution’s RMSD,
averaged over speeds v larger than 0.5Ævæ. Panels C1/C2 show distribution of component parallel/orthogonal to the velocity. Histograms show experimental
results. Thick curves (averages) surrounded by two thin curves (average 6 1 SD) show predictions of the HaCaT model, not a ﬁt to data shown here. (D)
Correlation functions for acceleration’s scatter about its mean. Panels D1/D2 are the autocorrelation function of parallel/orthogonal component, normalized to
unity at time difference zero. Panels D3/D4 are the cross-correlation function between parallel and orthogonal component of acceleration’s scatter about its
mean, for positive/negative time difference, in units of (RMSD of parallel component) 3 (RMSD of orthogonal component). Curves are theoretical expectation
values for the same quantities, according to the HaCaT model. (E) Data points are experimental velocity autocorrelation function f(t). Error bars on data points
underestimate true scatter as they were computed from experimental data that are correlated due to persistence of cell motion. The thick line is a guide to the eye
connecting theoretical result for f(t), computed from 15-min time-lapse position measurements, exactly as in experiment. Two thin lines are 6 1 SD on
theoretical result for given value of f(0). Red error bar on theoretical result for f(0) is the theoretical RMSD of this quantity. Stochastic errors tend to make the
whole data set shift up or down together. (F1) Histogram is distribution of observed speeds v, binned on v axis, and plotted with lin-log axis. Thick curve is
HaCaT model’s distribution of speeds, obtained as in experiment from 15-min time-lapse recordings of positions. Two thin curves are the theoretical RMSD of
experimental result with regards to theoretical curve, obtained as RMSD of many speed distributions, each obtained from an independent simulated trajectory
of duration equal to sum of durations of experimental trajectories. (F2) Histogram shows distribution of observed speeds v, binned on v2 axis, and plotted with
~Þ would fall on a straight line. Curves are the same as in panel F1. Histogram values scatter more than the
lin-log axis, so a Gaussian velocity distribution pðv
theoretical RMSD suggests they should, because they were computed from experimental data that are correlated due to persistence of cell motion, and unevenly
redistributed between histogram bins by the effect of ﬁnite pixel width. The latter effect was not included in theoretical curves shown here and in panels C1 and
C2, but was included in ﬁtted curves. Both kinds of curves are shown in Fig. 10.

Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

Cell Motility as Persistent Random Motion

917

PROPERTIES OF AN UNKNOWN THEORY
Fig. 4 E shows that the velocity autocorrelation function for
HaCaT cells is ﬁtted perfectly by a sum of two exponentials.
We consequently assume that
fðtÞ ¼ f1 e

jtj=P1

1 f2 e

jtj=P2

;

(4)

and ask which generalization of the OU model might yield
this function and the other properties of the data shown in
Fig. 4. Such a generalization must, like the OU model,
describe the rate of change of the cell’s velocity. This
acceleration cannot depend on a cell’s position ~ðtÞ;
r
nor
explicitly on spatial direction or time, because the cells crawl
on surfaces that are homogenous and isotropic, and their
environment is kept constant. So the acceleration must
depend only on the cell’s velocity, like in the OU model. We
expect some memory in a cell, however, so the acceleration
may depend not only on the current velocity, as in the OU
model, but on past velocities as well. This dependence must
~=dtæ~v } ~as
v
be linear, like in the OU model, to ensure that Ædv
in the red data in Fig. 4 B.
The noise term seems to have an isotropic amplitude s, as
in the OU model, because blue and magenta data in Fig. 4 B
coincide. But unlike the OU model’s amplitude, this amplitude must be speed dependent, s ¼ s(v), according to the
same data. The noise itself was uncorrelated to a good approximation, when measured with our 15-min time resolution; see Fig. 4 D. We consequently model the noise as
uncorrelated on all timescales, to keep the model as simple as
our data allow.
This list of properties of the yet unknown model, narrows
it down to the integro-differential equation
~
dv
¼ K  ~1
v sðvÞ~
h;
(5)
dt
where K is a memory kernel yet to be determined, except
causality demands that K(t) ¼ 0 for t , 0: the future must not
affect the present.
The asterisk denotes convolution, i.e.,
Rt
~ðt9Þdt9: K is a scalar function of
ðK  ~ÞðtÞ
v
¼ N Kðt  t9Þv
t, as opposed to a tensor of rank two, because the surface on
which the cells move, is isotropic to them. Isotropy means
that all directions are equivalent. When this equivalence
principle is enforced on the theory we wish to ﬁnd,
mathematics gives that K must transform under spatial
rotations as an invariant tensor, i.e., be a scalar. If the
isotropy of space is broken, as it is in chemotactic and
galvanotactic experiments, K is a tensor of rank two.

HaCaT THEORY
Equations 4 and 5 have only one solution for K; see Appendix
A. Inserted in Eq. 5, it results in the equation of motion
Z t
~
dv
2
gðtt9Þ
~ðt9Þ
~ðtÞ 1 a
dt9e
v
1 sðvðtÞÞ~
hðtÞ:
ðtÞ ¼ bv
dt
N
(6)

Here a, b, and g are known functions of P1, P2, and f1/
f2, and satisfy bg . a2, as they must for velocities to remain
ﬁnite under the dynamics of Eq. 6; see Appendix A. The term
in Eq. 6 containing b represents ‘‘loss of memory’’ of
velocity at average rate b1. The term containing a2, on the
other hand, represents ‘‘memory’’ with characteristic time
g1 and strength a2/g. This combination of memory was anticipated in Dunn and Brown (20). If g is given a sufﬁciently
large imaginary component, this model has an oscillatory
velocity autocorrelation function similar to the one suggested
in Shenderov and Sheetz (16) for Dictyostelium discoideum.
The experimental data shown in red in Fig. 4 B show
proportionality between velocity and the mean acceleration
at that velocity,
~=dtæ~v ¼ beff ~;
v
(7)
Ædv
like in the OU model. One can prove that Eq. 6 results in the
very same proportionality and ﬁnd beff(a, b, g) (see
Appendix A). So, apart from the experimental value for
beff, the red data contain no information that is not already
built into the model Eq. 6. But they do, of course, thereby
conﬁrm the choice of Eq. 6 as model.
Although K(t) was determined from f(t), the only information about s(v) that is contained in f(t), is the theory’s
‘‘ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem’’; see Appendix A, Eq. 24.
Thus, we are free to choose
sðvÞ ¼ s0 1 s1 v;

(8)

inspired by the data in Fig. 4 B, as long as the ‘‘ﬂuctuationdissipation theorem’’ is respected. This deﬁnes our model for
HaCaT cells.
With this choice, one can derive the steady-state distribution of velocities (see Appendix A),


a
exp

a
ae
1 1 v=vs
~Þ ¼
;
(9)
pHaCaT ðv
2
21a
2pvs
ð1 1 v=vs Þ
where vs [ s0/s1 and a [ 2beff =s21 : The moments Ævkæ are
also known analytically and are ﬁnite only for k , a.
Because data show Æs2(v)æ is ﬁnite, a . 2 is necessary for the
model to be consistent with the choice in Eq. 8.
~Þ is not a Gaussian distribution for s1 6¼
Clearly, pHaCaT ðv
0. But it is the same function for all models having the same
values for beff, s0, and s1, including, e.g., the case of no
memory kernel, a ¼ 0. This demonstrates the value of
plotting data as in Fig. 4 B. Experimental results for
~Þ and f(t) contain precise, important, but incomplete
pHaCaT ðv
information about the dynamics causing these functions. Fig.
4 B presents the experimental information in a manner that
suggests this dynamics more directly.
COMPARING THEORY AND EXPERIMENT:
HaCaT CASE
The theory in Eq. 6 was compared with experimental results
as follows: Eq. 6 was simulated numerically to obtain
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

918

theoretical trajectories of persistent random motions. These
trajectories were sampled with the same time lapse as was
used to record experimental trajectories, to have theoretical
results that can be compared with experimental data. Values
for coordinates obtained by this sampling were rounded to
the nearest-integer multiple of pixel widths, as described in
Appendix B, before results were computed from them with
the purpose of ﬁtting the theory to data. After the theory has
been ﬁtted in this manner, it is more convenient to compare
data with the smoother curves obtained from nonrounded
coordinates, if rounding only makes a theoretical curve
jagged. Direct inspection (Fig. 10 in Appendix B) shows
when this is legitimate (panels B–D), and when not (panel A).
~Þ—not the distribution
Thus, Fig. 4 F shows pHaCaT ðv
given in Eq. 9—but the distribution of velocities obtained by
time-lapse sampling the theory after it had been ﬁtted to
experimental data. For ﬁtting, the theory was both time-lapse
sampled and rounded to the nearest pixel. The velocity
distribution resulting from the latter procedure was ﬁtted to
the experimental distribution of velocities of HaCaT cells,
while simultaneously the theory’s mean acceleration and the
RMSD of its acceleration were ﬁtted to the experimental data
in Fig. 4 B, and its velocity autocorrelation function was
ﬁtted to the data in Fig. 4 E. As ﬁtting parameters we used a,
b, g, s0, s1—ﬁve ﬁtting parameters in a simultaneous ﬁt of
ﬁve functions to the experimental data shown in Fig. 4, B, E,
and F. Fig. 4, B–F, shows the resulting ﬁt.
The HaCaT model in Eq. 6 clearly captures the nature of the
data, including the data in Fig. 4 C. The latter aspect of the data
was not used when ﬁtting the theory. So the theoretical distributions that are shown as curves in Fig. 4 C are predictions
made by the theory for this aspect of the experimental data,
after the theory was ﬁtted to other aspects of the same data.
Experimental data and theory both differ from zero in the
same manner for the ﬁrst few hours in Fig. 4 D1. The same
behavior is seen in Fig. 5 D1. This agreement between theory
and experimental data is caused by a property of the theory
~j æ is an
that it picked up from other aspects of the data: ~
aj  Æa
uncorrelated Gaussian noise in the OU model, but in the
HaCaT model it also contains a small term linear in ~because
v
of the memory kernel. On the differential timescale it reads
~=dt  Ædv
~=dtæÞj~v ¼ beff~
v K ~
v 1 sðvÞ~
h: In the OU
ðdv
model the ﬁrst two terms on the right-hand side of this
identity cancel, because beff ¼ b and K(t) ¼ bd(t). In the
HaCaT model they don’t cancel, and cause the observed
small correlation.
NHDF THEORY
Fig. 5 shows results for NHDF cells. They move approximately twice as fast, on average, and are also in other ways
more dynamic than keratinocytes. Their mean acceleration
parallel to their velocity, e.g., decreases somewhat faster than
proportional to v (red data points in Fig. 5 B. Fig. 12 in
Appendix B shows this with maximal clarity, while fully
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

Selmeczi et al.

accounting for the time-lapse nature of the data.) Also, the
RMSD of the acceleration differs for the two directions: its
component orthogonal to the direction of motion is almost
constant as in the OU model. But its component parallel to
the direction of motion increases with v and doubles its value
in the window shown. This behavior is captured by two
modiﬁcations of Eq. 6: ﬁrstly, we replace the constant b with
an increasing function b(v). A ﬁrst-degree polynomial, b(v)
¼ b0 1 b1v, turns out to do the job, whereas a second degree
polynomial does not further improve the agreement between
theory and data. Secondly, we replace the scalar function
 ðv
~Þ [ sk ðvÞv̂5v̂1s? ðvÞv̌5v̌: Here
s(v) with the tensor s
v̂ ¼ ~=v;
v
v̌ is a unit vector orthogonal to ~;
v and sk(v) and
s?(v) are the RMSDs of the random components of the
acceleration, parallel and orthogonal to the velocity, respectively. The data in Fig. 5 B suggest that sk(v) and s?(v)
are different ﬁrst-degree polynomials in v, but with sk(0) ¼
 ðv
~Þ contains a total of three free parameters to be
s?(0), so s
ﬁtted, where s(v) contained two. This deﬁnes our motility
model for NHDF cells.
Like the HaCaT model, this NHDF model has a nonGaussian velocity distribution, shown in Fig. 5 F, but it cannot
be found analytically. Neither can the correlation function
f(t), shown in Fig. 5 E, though its simple exponential
behavior for t . 1 h indicates that good analytical approximations might be found there. The result of a simultaneous ﬁt of this NHDF model to all experimental data shown
in Fig. 5, B, E, and F, is shown in all panels in Fig. 5.
COMPARING THEORY AND EXPERIMENT:
NHDF CASE
Equation 6 was simulated numerically in its NHDF variant
and ﬁtted to the NHDF data shown in Fig. 5, B, E, and F, using
a, b0, b1, g, s0, s1k, s1? as ﬁtting parameters. The curves
shown in Fig. 5, C and D, are the theory’s predictions for the
aspect of the experimental data that are also shown there.
We tested the possibility that ambiguity in the choice of
pixel that marks a cell’s position might play a role. This was
tested by introducing this ambiguity in the theory, and then
ﬁtting the theory to the data with the ambiguity as a parameter. That resulted in a slightly better ﬁt, but there is little
ambiguity: only 1.5% of the times that a pixel is chosen,
should one of its four nearest neighbors be chosen at random
instead. So the data conﬁrm that the round-off error associated with using a pixel as coordinate is larger than the
ambiguity of this coordinate.
The NHDF model’s agreement with data could be better in
Fig. 5 B. The data could also be richer, however, and a theory
should not be built on a single data set. The NHDF theory is
not. Below, where we compare the model to data taken on
different surfaces, we ﬁnd better agreement between ﬁtted
theory and data for the average acceleration as function of
speed. There is room for improvement of the NHDF model.
We just don’t know a systematic way of going about it,

Cell Motility as Persistent Random Motion

919

FIGURE 5 Same as Fig. 4, but for NHDF cells and NHDF model. (C1) The asymmetry of the distribution for NHDF cells is more pronounced than is the
case for HaCaT cells. The NHDF model’s prediction for this distribution and that in panel C2 is shown as red lines. It is not a ﬁt. The model was ﬁtted only to
data in panels B, E, and F1. (D1) Red curve is the NHDF model’s prediction for the autocorrelation function for the acceleration’s scatter about its mean in
direction parallel to the velocity. Like the experimental data, it is small, but nonvanishing, though the model’s noise term is uncorrelated Gaussian. (E) Velocity
autocorrelation function. See caption to Fig. 4 E. (F panels) Distribution of speeds; see caption to Fig. 4 F.

except to suggest that more and better data are studied, since
it is a nonlinear theory that is called for.
RESULTS FOR MODEL PARAMETERS
Table 1 shows values for parameters in the HaCaT and
NHDF models, obtained by ﬁtting these models to data as
just described. The table also gives values for some quantities that characterize experimental data more directly. The
values given are those that resulted from the ﬁts, i.e., those
corresponding to the listed model-parameter values. In the
HaCaT case, the model parameters a, b, g, s0, s1 were
determined by ﬁtting. Then P0, P1, P2, g1, g2, beff, f1, f2,
Ævæ, Æv2æ, Æs2(v)æ were calculated from Eqs. 34–39. In the
NHDF case, a, b0, b1, g, s0, s1k, s1? were determined by
ﬁtting. Then the values of Ævæ, Æv2æ were measured in
a simulation of the ﬁtted model, and Æs2k ðvÞæ; Æs2? ðvÞæ were
computed from these values.

As a test of the computer algorithm used in the ﬁtting
procedure, Ævæ and Æv2æ were also measured in a computer
simulation of the HaCaT model. The validity of Eq. 39 was
veriﬁed for the measured values.
SAME CELLS ON DIFFERENT SURFACES
So far, we have studied HaCaT cells crawling on substrates
of collagen and NHDF cells crawling on TCPS. The qualitative differences between the two models we have found,
reﬂect qualitative differences between the two data sets they
were found from. These differences may be due to differences between the cell types, or between the surfaces, or
both. We now demonstrate that the differences are associated
with the cells, and not with the surfaces, by varying the
surfaces.
Fig. 6 shows motility data for NHDF cells on four different surfaces: glass, TCPS, ﬁbrillar collagen, and molecular
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

920

Selmeczi et al.

TABLE 1 Values for parameters in HaCaT and NHDF models
ﬁtted to data
HaCaT

NHDF

a (1/ h)
b, respectively b0 (1/ h)
b1 (1/mm)
g (1/ h)
s0 (mm/ h3/2)
s1k (1/ h1/2)
s1? (1/ h1/2)

1.5
4.1
–
1.0
11
1.3
1.3

2.9
2.1
0.06
2.1
7.3
2.8
0.9

beff (1/ h)
P0 (h)
P1 (h)
P2 (h)
g1 (dimensionless)
g2 (dimensionless)
f1 ((mm/ h)2)
f2 ((mm/ h)2)
Ævæ (mm/ h)
Æv2æ ((mm/ h)2)
Æs2k ðvÞæ1=2 ðmm=h3=2 Þ
Æs2? ðvÞæ1=2 ðmm=h3=2 Þ

3.4
0.51
0.21
2.4
0.86
0.14
209
94
11
260
31
31

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
15
614
74
28

Values above the line are for parameters in the HaCaT and NHDF models ﬁtted
to data in Figs. 4 and 5. Below the line are corresponding values for some
quantities that characterize experimental data, but cannot be compared directly
with data in ﬁgures above because the latter are ﬁnite-difference results.

collagen. Fig. 8 shows motility data for HaCaT cells on the
two collagen substrates. HaCaT cells did not show measurable motility on glass and TCPS during the ﬁrst 24 h of
the experiment.
Comparing the A panels in Figs. 6 and 8 we note a
qualitative difference: for HaCaT cells, the RMSD of the
acceleration’s two components are virtually identical functions of speed. For NHDF cells, on the other hand, the
RMSD of the acceleration’s component orthogonal to the
velocity is almost independent of speed, whereas the RMSD
of the component parallel to the velocity is strongly speed
dependent. No theory is needed to tell which cell type produced the data in any one of the six A panels in the two
ﬁgures. We have identiﬁed a cell-type-speciﬁc pattern in the
data that persists across all the different surfaces we have
data for. This pattern is reﬂected in the two models we found
above, and Figs. 6 and 8 show that the two models describe
the data in all six cases. It follows that the two models are
cell-type speciﬁc. Only their parameter values vary between
surfaces. These parameter values can then be used to characterize the surfaces.
SCALING ANALYSIS, DATA COLLAPSE,
AND PARAMETERIZATION OF
SURFACE DIFFERENCES
In principle, the two models put ﬁve, respectively seven,
parameters at our disposal for the characterization of surfaces. In practice, these parameters may not all parameterize
independent properties of surfaces. Also, even if they do, we
need at least eight different surfaces to demonstrate this for
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

the seven parameters of the NHDF model, and six different
surfaces for the ﬁve parameters of the HaCaT model. Finally,
even if we had data for a sufﬁcient number of surfaces, ﬁnite
statistics might blur subtle differences. For these reasons,
a phenomenological analysis of the actual information content of our data is a healthier approach. It has the additional
advantage of being model independent. Thus, it is a practical
tool that can describe how motile cells and microorganisms
experience different surfaces without requiring a model for
their motility.
NHDF data collapse
Fig. 6 shows motility data for NHDF cells on glass, on TCPS,
on substrate of molecular collagen, and on substrate of ﬁbrillar
collagen. Compared to the other three surfaces, glass results in
elevated scatter in the acceleration’s components (panel A), in
shorter correlations (panel C), and in higher velocities (panel
D). However, the two distributions describing the acceleration’s scatter about its average (panel B) do not differ
between surfaces when measured as here, in units of the
scatter’s RMSD. The speed distribution looks like it may have
the same property: invariant if rescaled to give the distribution
of speeds in units of the average speed. Fig. 7 B shows quite
convincingly that this is the case. So the mean speed is the
only aspect of the velocity distribution of NHDF cells that will
distinguish surfaces. Other aspects of the distribution is
invariant between surfaces, at least with our experimental
resolution and for the four surfaces studied here.
Maybe the mean speed exhausts differences between other
quantities of dimension speed and acceleration. To ﬁnd out,
we rescaled all velocities so they are measured in units of
their corresponding mean speed. Fig. 7 A shows how the
accelerations of these dimensionless velocities average and
scatter as functions of dimensionless speed. The ﬁgure shows
data collapse: the mean speed captures the whole difference
between surfaces as far as this plot is concerned.
Fig. 7 C shows the velocity autocorrelation functions in
~2 æ: This
Fig. 6 C, but in units of mean-squared velocity, Æv
2
normalization, rather than Ævæ , is conventional because it
is more practical, as f(t)/f(0) ¼ 1 for t ¼ 0. These functions discriminate between surfaces in a manner that is not
captured by the mean speed. This was to be expected, because another physical dimension, time, is involved.
Apart from the initial rapid decrease, the velocity autocorrelation functions in Fig. 7 C show a slower, exponential
decrease over most of the times where they can be measured.
This exponential decrease has a different characteristic time,
t0, for glass, TCPS, and collagen, whereas the two kinds of
collagen cannot be distinguished. So t0 discriminates between surfaces in a manner that might be independent of the
mean speed Ævæ.
To test for this independence, we form their product,
a length. The theories presented here do not contain any
natural length scales, but cells do, e.g., their size. A theory

Cell Motility as Persistent Random Motion

921

FIGURE 6 Motility data for NHDF cells on four different surfaces, from 30-min time-lapse records. (Rows from top) Glass, TCPS, molecular collagen, and
ﬁbrillar collagen. (A panels) Average acceleration and RMSD of acceleration, both as functions of speed, for directions parallel and orthogonal to velocity.
Compare Fig. 5 B. (B panels) Distribution of acceleration minus mean acceleration. Panels B1/B2 show distribution of component parallel/orthogonal to the
~ðtÞ  ~ð0Þæ:
velocity, in units of its RMSD. Compare Fig. 5 C. (C panels) Velocity autocorrelation function fðtÞ ¼ Æv
v
Compare Fig. 5 E. (D panels) Speed
~Þ against speed v. Compare Fig. 5 F1.
distribution 2p v pðv

might resolve such a length scale in motility data, and if it is
the same on different surfaces, t0 is just the inverse of Ævæ up
to a constant, hence no independent discriminator. Table 2
lists t0, Ævæ, and their product. The product is not constant for
a given cell type, so t0 is an independent characteristic of

compatible cell-and-surface combinations. We note that the
product has a value similar to the cells’ size. Any radically
different value would have been surprising.
Fig. 7 D shows the same velocity autocorrelation functions as in Fig. 7 C, but as functions of dimensionless relative
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

922

Selmeczi et al.

FIGURE 7 Same data as in Fig. 6, but with
all velocities and accelerations given in units
of the mean velocity on a given surface. (A)
Average and RMSD of acceleration’s components, as function of speed/(mean speed). (B)
Velocity distribution as function of speed/(mean
speed). (C) Dimensionless velocity autocorrelation functions f(t)/f(0). They clearly distinguish three kinds of surfaces, the discriminator
being the characteristic time of their long, exponentially decreasing tails, and clearly cannot
distinguish substrates of molecular collagen
from ﬁbrillar ditto. (D) Same as in panel C, but
as function of reduced time, i.e., time divided
by characteristic time of tail. Plotted this way,
the tails all have slope 1. The data collapse is an
additional result. The normalized correlation
function of reduced time cannot distinguish
surfaces.

time: time in units of the characteristic time for the exponential decrease. Plotted this way, the correlation functions are guaranteed to have the same slope, except during
their rapid initial decrease. We see a data collapse within
underestimated error bars. Our resolution of time could be
better at earlier times, especially for glass and TCPS. But for
this 30-min time-lapse data, we must conclude that the data

collapse leaves no other discriminator of dimension time to
be found in the velocity autocorrelation functions.
HaCaT data collapse
In the HaCaT theory, t0 is identical to P2. Table 1 lists a 12times-smaller value for P1, the shortest characteristic time

TABLE 2 Experimental values and parameter values
HaCaT

NHDF

Molecular

Fibrillar

Glass

TCPS

Molecular

Fibrillar

Ævæ (mm/h)
t0 (h)
Ævæ t0 (mm)

11
3.1
34

11
1.8
20

25
2
49

16
3.6
56

14
1.1
15

13
1.1
14

a (1/h)
b, respectively b0 (1/h)
b1 (1/mm)
g (1/h)
s0 (mm/h3/2)
s1k (1/h1/2)
s1? (1/h1/2)

1.7
4.7
–
1.0
11
1.4
1.4

1.6
4.8
–
1.3
14
1.3
1.3

2.2
1.5
0.043
1.6
33
3.0
0.02

1.9
2.1
0.073
0.8
25
3.0
0.006

2.3
6.8
0.015
0.8
24
2.6
0.29

1.8
3.5
0.057
0.7
21
2.8
0.12

Values above the line are experimental values. Below the line are parameter values from ﬁt of models to experimental data. HaCaT data obtained with 15-min
time lapse; NHDF data with 30-min time lapse.
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

Cell Motility as Persistent Random Motion

in f(t). Its product with Ævæ listed in the same place, is 2.3 mm,
much shorter than HaCaT cells’ size, and consistent with
the idea that when we resolve ﬁner timescales, we resolve
smaller spatial properties of the cells, in this case possibly
their pseudopodia. Cells do move in an uneven manner, as
they haul themselves forward on their pseudopodia (10).
Fig. 8 shows motility data for HaCaT cells on substrate of
ﬁbrillar collagen, and on substrate of molecular collagen.
They look indistinguishable, except for the velocity autocorrelation functions. The mean speed is the same on the two
surfaces, to within 4%, an insigniﬁcant difference. So no
signiﬁcant rescaling was done to check for data collapse. Fig.
9 A seems to show a collapse. The average acceleration as
function of speed seems smaller on molecular collagen, but
this may be a coincidence due to limited statistics and the fact
that the data are correlated. Fig. 9 B shows a very convincing
identity of pHaCaT on the two surfaces.
Fig. 9 C shows the normalized velocity autocorrelation
functions. They are the only aspect of data from the two
surfaces that seem to distinguish the surfaces. But the statistics are poor, the data correlated, and we have less than
three correlation-times worth of data, so, as indicated by the
theoretical standard deviation, the two functions may not be
signiﬁcantly different. For this reason we merged these data
to obtain better statistics in the HaCaT analysis presented
in the ﬁrst part of this article. If we nevertheless attempt to
extract a characteristic time from each of the tails in Fig. 9 C,

923

and replot the correlation functions as functions of reduced
time, we get the data collapse shown in Fig. 9 D.
Different or not, the HaCaT model captures the nature
of these data in Figs. 8 and 4. We have also reanalyzed the
15-min time-lapse trajectories on which Fig. 4 is based, but
using only every second data point, as if we did 30-min timelapse recording. The velocity autocorrelation function is then
less well resolved, but the qualitative features that distinguish the HaCaT model from the NHDF model become
more manifest (not shown here): the average acceleration is
distinctly linear in its speed dependence, and the RMSD of
the acceleration’s two components is more clearly the same
function s(v) of the speed.

DISCUSSION
All those parameters. . .
With enough parameters one can ﬁt anything. Have we
sufﬁciently justiﬁed the ﬁve-parameter HaCaT model and
the seven-parameter NHDF model? Or will other models
with less (as many) parameters do as well (better)? How
many parameters are really needed?
Any model that is a mathematical relationship between
velocity and time, must contain at least one dimensionful
parameter, because velocity and time have different dimensions. The previous section’s phenomenological analysis

FIGURE 8 Motility data for HaCaT cells on two different surfaces, from 15-min time-lapse records. (Rows from top) Molecular collagen, ﬁbrillar collagen.
(A panels) Average acceleration and RMSD of acceleration, both as functions of speed, for directions parallel and orthogonal to velocity. Compare Fig. 4 B. (B
panels) Distribution of acceleration minus mean acceleration. Panels B1/B2 show distribution of component parallel/orthogonal to the velocity, in units of its
~Þ against speed v.
RMSD. Compare Fig. 4 C. (C panels) Velocity autocorrelation function f(t). Compare Fig. 4 E. (D panels) Speed distribution 2p v pðv
Compare Fig. 4 F1.
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

924

Selmeczi et al.

FIGURE 9 Same data as in Fig. 8, but with
all velocities and accelerations given in units
of the mean velocity on a given surface. (A)
Average and RMSD of acceleration’s components, as function of speed/(mean speed).
(B) Velocity distribution as function of speed/
(mean speed). (C) Dimensionless velocity
autocorrelation functions f(t)/f(0). They
maybe distinguish two kinds of surfaces,
the discriminator being the characteristic time
of the exponentially decreasing tails. (D)
Same as in panel C, but as function of
reduced time, i.e., time divided by characteristic time of tail. Plotted this way, the tails all
have slope 1. The data collapse is an
additional result: the normalized correlation
function of reduced time cannot distinguish
surfaces.

revealed that NHDF data require at least two independent
dimensionful parameters from a model that is to describe
the data on different surfaces. The data collapse achieved
in the previous section indicates that no more than two
parameters are needed, because in mathematical terms the
data collapse means that any relation between the variables
~=Ævæ; t=t0 Þ ¼ 0; where F is a dimensioncan be written Fðv
less functional of dimensionless variables. (The relationship F may involve differentiation and integration w.r.t.
time, as it does in Eq. 6 and the NHDF version of it, and it
may depend only on v/Ævæ, as in p(v), or only on t/t0, as in
f(t).) The collapse of the HaCaT data leads to the same
conclusion, except there is no experimental proof that the
two dimensionful parameters are independent of each
other. So a single parameter might in principle do.
If there were no data collapse, F would depend on the
surface under consideration, and that would introduce additional, dimensionless parameters in F. But our 30-min timelapse data do collapse, so we do not need such extra
dimensionless parameters to model them. Data taken with
better time resolution can resolve the initial rapid decrease in
the velocity autocorrelation that we found in our 15-min
time-lapse data. This initial decrease contains another timeBiophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

scale, and another amplitude of dimension (velocity). Divided
by t0, respectively Ævæ2, this additional timescale and amplitude
make up two dimensionless parameters that probably will
vary with surfaces. We have yet to address this question
experimentally.
So when we here refer to the HaCaT model as being a ﬁveparameter model, most of the parameters we refer to, were
not forced upon us by experiments that prove the need for
them by proving that they change with some external condition, such as choice of surface. They are parameters of
a different, less absolute status. They parameterize the function space in which we ﬁnd F, and their number may depend
on our choice of basis functions in that abstract space.
Suppose, e.g., that a feature is described by an exponential
function, but we have not realized this, and use a polynomial
description in the interval in which we observe this feature.
An exponential function has an amplitude and a characteristic
range, i.e., two parameters. A polynomial of degree higher
than one contains more than two parameters—unnecessary
extra parameters in this example, as they can be expressed as
functions of the ﬁrst two parameters if one is aware of the
exponential nature of the feature. So when we parameterize
features in the data that we model, this potential ambiguity

Cell Motility as Persistent Random Motion

must be borne in mind when we count the number of
parameters introduced. We do, and ﬁnd an unambiguous
result.
The power of symmetry
If an unknown theory must possess certain symmetry properties, the enforcement of these properties is an extremely
powerful tool for narrowing down the search for this theory
and for deﬁning remaining properties that must be determined experimentally.
The heuristic, data-driven derivation of the motility models
presented above may not have done justice to the symmetry
properties that guided us through their derivation. So we
brieﬂy repeat them here: we demanded that theories must be
covariant under spatial rotations and invariant under translations in space and time. We ﬁrst checked consistency of these
assumptions with data. That done, these symmetries permeated
our phenomenological approach. Data were averaged and
plotted in manners based on the assumption of these symmetries. Only then did we identify parameters to be ﬁtted. In this
process, it turned out that HaCaT data were consistent with
isotropic noise amplitude, so that further reduction in the
number of parameters was achieved with the assumption that
 ðv
~Þ ¼ sðvÞ
s
1: Our NHDF data do not demonstrate this
isotropy of noise amplitudes, so in this case isotropy of space
 ðv
~Þ to sk ðvÞv̂5v̂1s? ðvÞv̌5v̌:
only simpliﬁes s
Parameter counting
In the HaCaT case, space-time symmetries and the choice of
simple, uncorrelated noise narrowed down potential models
to those of the form given by Eq. 5. This form also assumes
that the cell population studied is made up of a single kind of
cells, as opposed to several subpopulations of different kinds
of cells. The latter possibility is discussed below and eliminated with Occam’s razor after some rigorous math.
Parameterization of the experimental result for f(t)
required four parameters, two for each of the two exponential
functions with which we modeled f(t). Exponential functions
are the natural choice of basis functions for f(t), and leave no
room for further simpliﬁcation: Four parameters are required.
From this assumption and Eq. 5 followed with mathematical rigor explicit expressions for K and for Æs2(v)æ. The latter
expression is the ‘‘ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem’’ for the
theory, and a constraint on the choice of the otherwise undetermined function s(v). That function was chosen to be
a ﬁrst-degree polynomial inspired by the RMSD data in Fig.
4 B. A ﬁrst-degree polynomial contains two parameters. So
does any other nonconstant function that one might choose to
describe the RMSD data in Fig. 4 B with. This follows from
dimensional arguments alone: the two axes in Fig. 4 B have
different dimensions, and both slope and intercept of the
RMSD data are nonzero, hence must be parameterized. So
no less than two parameters will do. We have already one
constraint between them. Consequently, one additional

925

parameter must be introduced here. No more parameters
are introduced in the HaCaT model, so it is a bona ﬁde ﬁveparameter model, and the only such model that describes
the data, given the assumptions we have made: These were
assumptions of maximum simplicity: symmetry, uncorrelated noise, and only one type of cell. Our HaCaT model
cannot be replaced by a simpler model, nor with a model
with fewer parameters—not with our HaCaT data. The only
possibility that we have not considered is whether a mixed
population of cells with a simpler dynamics will describe the
data with better intellectual economy. This is the subject of
the next subsection.
As for the NHDF model, its deterministic part is nonlinear,
so no similar mathematical rigor can be achieved for it. The
nonlinearity itself, b’s dependence on v, is modeled with
a ﬁrst-degree polynomial, which introduces one additional
parameter, b1. Any other function basis will also require two
parameters to describe b(v), for dimensional reasons and
because both slope and intercept of b(v) are nonvanishing.
But the choice to make b v-dependent, while leaving a and
g constant, was ad hoc, and not based on any mathematical
rigor, only mathematical simplicity and the fact that it works.
The data themselves only tell us that beff is not a constant. We
did try to give a, b, and g the same dependence on v, that
which beff has according to the data in Fig. 5 B. According to
the ‘‘equivalent theory’’ in Appendix A, this is a mathematically symmetric manner to introduce v-dependence in these
coefﬁcients, and would, to the extent the deﬁnition of beff in
Eq. 37 remained true also for this nonlinear theory, result in
a theoretical beff(v) that by construction agrees with the data.
Unfortunately, Eq. 37 does not remain true, we found, and
choosing only b v-dependent results in a model that agrees
with experimental data, whereas this more elegant attempt
does not. Ad hoc or not, another parameter has been
introduced in the model, which now contains a total of four
parameters in its deterministic part.
The two noise amplitudes sk(v) and s?(v) were modeled
with two ﬁrst-degree polynomials having the same value at
v ¼ 0, i.e., a total of three parameters describe the model’s
stochastic part. Fewer parameters will not do, also not in
a different function basis. We conclude that despite spacetime symmetries, the richer structure of the NHDF data
forces us to use seven parameters in the NHDF model, and,
worse, one of them was introduced in an ad hoc manner.
Other models may describe the same data as well or better,
but will hardly need fewer parameters to do that.
Why ‘‘two simpler subpopulations’’ is not
a simpler explanation
Obviously, a cell population consisting of two subpopulations, 1 and 2, having simple exponential velocity autocorrelation functions fi(t) ¼ fi(0) exp(jtj/Pi), i ¼ 1, 2, would
also result in Eq. 4: let wi denote the fraction of cells in
subpopulation i. Then w1 1 w2 ¼ 1 and
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

926

Selmeczi et al.

fðtÞ ¼ w1 f1 ð0Þe

jtj=P1

1 w2 f2 ð0Þe

jtj=P2

:

(10)

So how can we tell whether we have two subpopulations
or not? That could easily be done if we had enough data
in individual cell trajectories to calculate velocity autocorrelation functions for individual trajectories. If trajectoryspeciﬁc autocorrelation functions all are simple exponentials
with one of two persistence times, then we have two
subpopulation. Cells could then be classiﬁed by the value of
their individual persistence time, as computed from each
cell’s trajectory. On the other hand, if we have only one
population, velocity autocorrelation functions computed
from individual trajectories should all be identical, and
each be a sum of the same two exponentials. Unfortunately,
our data are far from rich enough to support this approach.
We need to average over the cell population to get sufﬁcient
statistics.
Doing that, we ask whether two simpler motility models,
one for each subpopulation, will describe the HaCaT data as
well as the HaCaT model does. To answer this question, we
must consider all motility models that result in a velocity
autocorrelation function that is just a simple exponential.
Then we limit the search to the subset of such models which
have uncorrelated noise term, because the HaCaT model has
that, and we are looking for simpler models. For this subset
of models, we can reuse the derivation given in Appendix A.
It proves that motility models with these properties are
differential equations of the form
~
dv
~=Pi 1 si ðvÞ~
¼ v
hi :
dt

(11)

So we use one such model for each subpopulation, each
model having its own persistence time Pi and speedhi :
dependent noise si ðvÞ~
~Þ that result
The two steady-state velocity distributions pi ðv
~Þ ¼
from these two equations, must add up to pHaCaT ðv
~Þ 1 w2 p2 ðv
~Þ that agrees with the experimental distriw1 p1 ðv
bution in Fig. 4 D. But from two subpopulations it is very
~=dtæ~v } ~demonstrated
v
by the
difﬁcult to get the property Ædv
experimental data in Fig. 4 C. Equation 11 yields
 
~
dv
~=Pi ;
¼ v
(12)
dt ~v
for expectation values within a single subpopulation, hence
for the full population
 
~
dv
~;
¼ beff ðvÞv
(13)
dt ~v
with
beff ðvÞ [

~Þ=Pi
+i¼1;2 wi pi ðv
:
~Þ
+i¼1;2 wi pi ðv

(14)

This expression for beff(v) is only constant, as in the
~Þ ¼ p2 ðv
~Þ for all values of ~:
v This is
HaCaT data, if p1 ðv
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

a very special condition with precise consequences: Eq. 11,
like the HaCaT model, leads to Eqs. 42 and 43 with bi ¼ 1/Pi
~Þ ¼ pðvÞ given in
in place of beff. So we know that pi ðv
Eq.
45
for
i
¼
1,
2.
From
these
two
identities
follows that
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
P1 s1 ðvÞ ¼ P2 s2 ðvÞ for all values of v. Using this in Eq.
11, we see that the two subpopulations obey identical
equations of motion, when time t is measured in units of
characteristic time Pi: the two subpopulations move in
identical manners, except to clocks that move with different
speeds, one being a factor P1/P2 slower than the other.
If we assume that this very special property of the cell
population is satisﬁed and assume the simplest possible
form for s(v) that is allowed by the data, Eq. 8, then we are
still left with a ﬁve-parameter model: P1, P2, s0, s1, and the
ratio between the two subpopulations’ sizes, are to be
determined by ﬁtting.
We could not ﬁt this model to the data. We could ﬁt it
perfectly well to some of the data sets plotted in Fig. 4. We
knew that before trying from the built-in properties of this
model. But, surprisingly, we could not ﬁt it to all of the data
that we ﬁtted the HaCaT model so well to.
Thus, we appear to have excluded those two-population
models that à priori seemed able to describe the HaCaT
data with ﬁve parameters. This is not a rigorous proof, but
it does exclude the obvious. Because we also have no reason
to believe that we have two subpopulations, Occam’s razor
favors the explanation that the HaCaT cell population is
a single population described by the HaCaT model with
memory in Eq. 6, as this model is simple, generic, and embodies only assumptions that were read off the data.

CONCLUSIONS
We recommend that motility data are plotted like we have
done repeatedly above. Even if one has no intention of
modeling the data, these plots are useful. As we have seen,
they may expose qualitative features in the data that can be
associated with the motile organism, here, cell type.
They may also point to quantitative phenomenological
features in the data that may be extracted and used, both to
characterize the data quantitatively, and to bring out the
qualitative features that are invariant, we saw, in a data
collapse. This is much sounder than blindly ﬁtting Eq. 1 to
the mean-squared displacement.
Finally, plotting as we did revealed the models that do
capture the nature of the data. The manner in which these
models were found is readily applied to other cells and
other motile organisms. As illustrated here, it may capture
qualitative aspects of motility speciﬁc to a given organism.
It may also capture quantitative differences in a given
organism’s motility in different environments. More generally, the cell-speciﬁc nature of models found with this
approach may help to distinguish intrinsic differences in cell
behavior from effects caused by surroundings.

Cell Motility as Persistent Random Motion

927

Biological origins of motility patterns are not revealed by
our top-down approach. But because our approach does
capture motility patterns, its models are natural targets for
bottom-up explanations in terms of biological processes in
the cell (30,31). These models also invite reﬂection over
possible origins and purposes of the features they describe.
For example the two different timescales of the velocity
autocorrelation function beg an explanation. Does the shorter
of the two timescales, e.g., describe a short-lived component
in the cell’s motion associated with actions of individual
pseudopodia? Or the relative motion of the nucleus within
the cell? Or is there a third explanation?
Also, the HaCaT model’s random changes in velocity occur
with almost the same amplitude in all directions. This matches
the facts that keratinocytes move to ﬁnd—in any direction—
other, similar cells with which they connect to form sheets. In
contrast, the NHDF model has stronger accelerations at low
speeds and stronger decelerations at high speeds than the
HaCaT model has. Thus, speeds near the mean speed are more
favored in the NHDF model. Motion is also more persistent in
the NHDF model, because random changes of direction occur
with much lower amplitude than random changes of speed.
This may relate to the fact that ﬁbroblasts in tissue synthesize
and arrange collagen ﬁbers into oriented bundles. This activity
requires the cells to move with orientational persistence, and
may be optimized at a speciﬁc speed.

APPENDIX A: SOME MATHEMATICAL DETAILS
Deriving a motility model from the
experimental data
Figs. 4 D and 5 D show the correlation functions for ﬂuctuations in
experimental accelerations ~
aj about their speed-dependent averages in Figs.
4 B and 5 B. One sees that all correlations are zero, except a few that are
fairly negligible, at least in a ﬁrst attempt to model the data. We consequently
~ ðtÞ=dt;
model these ﬂuctuations with an uncorrelated noise ~
hðtÞ [ dW
~ ðtÞ are uncorrelated Wiener processes (32), so
where the components of W
/

Æ~
hðtÞæ ¼ 0 ;

Æhj ðtÞhk ðt9Þæ ¼ dj;k dðt  t9Þ;

(15)

for all times t and t9, with dj,k and d(t  t9) Kronecker’s and Dirac’s
d-functions, respectively.
Equation 5 is formally solved by

~
v ¼ g  ðsðvÞ~
hÞ;

(16)

where the propagator g satisﬁes

dg
¼ K  g 1 d:
dt

(17)

Here d(t) is Dirac’s d-function, and the retarded solution must be chosen to
ensure causality, i.e., g(t) ¼ 0 for t , 0 so that

The future must not affect the present, so ~ðtÞ
v depends only on the noise
sðvðt9ÞÞ~
hðt9Þ at times t9, t.
After Fourier transformation, Eq. 17 gives

g̃ðvÞ ¼

N

dt9 gðt  t9Þsðvðt9ÞÞ~
hðt9Þ:

(18)

(19)

where

g̃ðvÞ ¼

Z N

dt e gðtÞ ¼

Z N

ivt

N

ivt

dt e gðtÞ;

(20)

0

and a similar expression for K. By Cauchy’s theorem, causality of g(t) and
K(t) is synonymous with g̃ðvÞ and K̃ðvÞ being analytical in the upper
complex v-half-plane where Im v . 0.
K is found by determining g̃ðvÞ from the Fourier transformed version of
Eq. 4,

f̃ðvÞ ¼

2f1 =P1
2f2 =P2
2 1 2
2;
P2
1
v
P
1
2 1v

(21)

and Wiener-Khintchine theorem, which states what we ﬁnd if we insert Eq.
16 in the deﬁnition of f(t):


f̃ðvÞ ¼ nÆs ðvÞæg̃ðvÞg̃ ðvÞ:
2

(22)

Equation 19 shows that

1
for v/N
g̃ðvÞ;
iv

(23)

because we expect and demand that K̃ðvÞ is bounded for v/N: This we
do because K̃ðvÞ } vk asymptotically will make the kth time derivative of
~ðtÞ
v
appear on the right-hand side of Eq. 5, whereas K should be an
integral kernel, at most as singular as a Dirac d-function. Inserting Eq. 23 in
Eq. 22 and comparing with Eq. 21, one ﬁnds the only information about
s(v) contained in f(t):

nÆs ðvÞæ ¼ 2ðf1 =P1 1 f2 =P2 Þ;
2

(24)

which is the theory’s ‘‘ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem’’. See also Eq. 36
below.
Fluctuation-dissipation theorems occur in statistical mechanical models
quite similar in form to the one derived here. Quotation marks are
nevertheless necessary when using that name here, because of differences of
content: Eq. 6 is not Newton’s second law, its right-hand side does not
describe forces, and there is no kinetic energy to dissipate. The mathematics
is the same, however, except there is no Boltzmann equilibrium statistical
mechanics with a temperature that must be matched in equilibrium, so it is
somewhat natural to use the name in quotation marks.
Equation 21 shows that f̃ is a rational function of v, and the only rational
function g̃ that reproduces f̃’s singularities and asymptotic behavior at
v/N while being analytical for Im v . 0, is

g̃ðvÞ ¼

g1
g2
1 1
;
1
P1  iv P2  iv

(25)

where g1 and g2 are constants satisfying g1 1 g2 ¼ 1 because of Eq. 23.
Inserting Eq. 25 in Eq. 22 and comparing with Eq. 21 gives

Z t

~ðtÞ
v ¼

1
;
K̃ðvÞ  iv

g1 ¼

P2  P0
;
P2  P1

g2 ¼

P0  P1
;
P2  P1

(26)

Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

928

Selmeczi et al.

where we have introduced the notation

sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
f1 P1 1 f2 P2
:
P0 ¼
f1 =P1 1 f2 =P2

1
¼ b  a2 =g
P0
qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
1
2
2
¼ ðb 1 g 1 ðb  gÞ 1 4a Þ
P1 2
qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
1
2
2
¼ ðb 1 g  ðb  gÞ 1 4a Þ
P2 2
1
0

(27)

With g̃ thus known, we solve Eq. 19 for K̃; ﬁnding
2

K̃ðvÞ ¼ iv 1

1
a
;
¼b
g  iv
g̃ðvÞ

(28)

1B
bg
C
g1 ¼ @1 1 qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃA
2
2
2
ðb  gÞ 1 4a

where we have introduced the notation

pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðP2  P0 ÞðP0  P1 Þ
a¼
P1 P2
P1 1 P2  P0
b¼
P1 P2
P0
g¼
:
P1 P2

1B
bg
C
g2 ¼ @1  qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃA:
2
2
2
ðb  gÞ 1 4a

(34)

Then one has f1 and f2 as function of a, b, g through

(29)

Fourier transforming this result, we have



2
2
fj ¼ nÆsðvÞ æ gj tj =2 1 g1 g2 P1 P2 =ðP1 1 P2 Þ ;

(35)

for j ¼ 1, 2. Here, in general

KðtÞ ¼ bdðtÞ  a uðtÞe
2

gt

;

(30)

which, inserted in Eq. 5 gives Eq. 6.

~ æ;
nÆsðvÞ æ ¼ 2beff Æv
2

2

(36)

where we have introduced the notation

Obviously, a, b, and g are independent functions of P1, P2, and, through
P0, of f1/f2. They satisfy the inequality bg . a2. This ensures that the
deterministic part of Eq. 6 on the average diminishes velocities. This is
necessary in order for velocities to remain ﬁnite under the inﬂuence of the
noise term. When this inequality is satisﬁed, one can invert the relationship,
and ﬁnd P1, P2, and f1/f2 as functions of a, b, and g. Thus, a, b, g, s0, and
s1 can be chosen as a more natural set of independent parameters for the
motility model.

ðb 1 gÞðbg  a Þ
;
2
2
bg  a 1 g
2

beff ¼

(37)

and thereby obtained a more recognizable form for the theory’s ‘‘ﬂuctuationdissipation theorem’’. Equation 36 follows from Eq. 24 combined with
~2 æ and the deﬁnitions of a, b, and g.
fð0Þ ¼ Æv
Both sides of Eq. 36 depend on our choice for s(v), however, as well as
on a, b, g. With our choice, Eq. 8,

ÆsðvÞ æ ¼ s0 1 2s0 s1 Ævæ 1 s1 Æv æ;
2

Equivalent theory
A small trick simpliﬁes numerical integration of Eq. 6 as well as some
analytical considerations. Rather than doing the convolution integral in Eq. 6
at each time step of its integration, we introduce the auxiliary velocity

~ðtÞ ¼ a
V

1

0

Z t
dt9 e
N

gðtt9Þ

~ðt9Þ;
v

(32)

2Mð3; a 1 2; aÞ
vs
ða 1 1Þða  1Þ
6Mð4; a 1 2; aÞ
2
2
v ;
Æv æ ¼
ða 1 1Þða  1Þða  2Þ s

where
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

1 g2 e

t=P2

Þ;

(39)

where M is Kummer’s function. These two moments are special cases of
k

(33)

(40)

for k any real number satisfying 2 , k , a, which follows from Eq. 9. Here
B is Euler’s integral of the ﬁrst kind.
Isotropy and linearity of Eq. 32 ensures

~ðtÞæ~ðtÞ
~ðtÞ;
ÆV
¼ jv
v

The speed-dependent noise amplitude s(v) makes the HaCaT model
nonlinear. Some of its properties can nevertheless be determined analytically.
Its velocity autocorrelation function, f(t) in Eq. 4, is one example. Because
the theory was constructed over f(t)’s known form, Eq. 4, this result is not
surprising. First one ﬁnds the propagator as function of a, b, g,
t=P1

(38)

Æv æ ¼ a Bðk 1 2; a  kÞMðk 1 2; a 1 2; aÞvs ;

Analytical solution of HaCaT model

gðtÞ ¼ uðtÞðg1 e

2

Ævæ ¼

k

~
dv
~ðtÞ 1 sðvðtÞÞ~
~ðtÞ 1 aV
ðtÞ ¼ bv
hðtÞ
dt
~
dV
~ðtÞ:
~ðtÞ  gV
ðtÞ ¼ av
dt

2

where

(31)

and solve a mathematically equivalent problem of two coupled, but ordinary,
differential equations,

2

(41)

where j is a constant of proportionality and the subscripted brackets denote
‘‘expectation value for given value of subscript’’, here ~ðtÞ:
v
By taking the
vector product with ~ðtÞ
v on both sides of this equation, and then averaging
~æ ¼ jÆv
~ V
~2 æ; from which follows that j ¼ ag/(bg 
over ~ðtÞ;
v
one obtains Æv
a2 1 g 2), hence Eq. 7. This and other useful relations are obtained by using the
~ðtÞæ; and ÆV
~ðtÞ2 æ are independent of time. Taking
~ðtÞ  V
~ðtÞ2 æ; Æv
fact that Æv
their time derivatives and using Eq. 32, one obtains a closed, linear set of
equations for these second moments with Æs2(v)æ as inhomogeneous term.
Equation 41 also has as consequence that the Fokker-Planck equation
~; tÞ; the probability distribution at time t on the space of
~; V
(33) for pðv
~Þ; can be integrated over all velocities V
~ to obtain a closed
~; V
velocities ðv

Cell Motility as Persistent Random Motion

929
R
~; tÞ: Closure depends decisively on the fact
~; tÞ[ dnRV pðv
~; V
equation for pðv
R
~; tÞV
~= dn V pðv
~; tÞ ¼ ÆV
~ðtÞæ~ðtÞ
~; V
~; V
is
that the ﬁrst moment d n V pðv
v
proportional to ~:
v The resulting equation reads

~; tÞ=@t ¼ @j~ðv
~; tÞ=@v
~;
@pðv

(42)

where



1
2
~jðv
~; tÞ ¼ beff~pðv
~; tÞ =@v
~:
v ~; tÞ  @
sðvÞ pðv
2

(43)

~Þ ¼ pðvÞ; so the
Its stationary solution is rotation invariant, pðv
~Þ is radial, hence must vanish because of the
corresponding current ~jðv
reﬂecting boundary condition at v ¼ 0. Thus,



1
2
0 ¼ beff v pðvÞ  d
sðvÞ pðvÞ =dv;
2

(44)

which is solved by

 Z v

beff
2beff v9
pðvÞ ¼
dv9 2
exp 
;
2
s ðv9Þ
ps ðvÞ
0

(45)

where the normalization chosen corresponds to our case of interest, n ¼ 2,

Z N

dv 2p v pðvÞ ¼ 1:

(46)

0

~Þ in Eq. 9, whereas only s(v)
Insertion of s(v) ¼ s0 1 s1v yields pHaCaT ðv
constant, independent of v, yields a Gaussian distribution of velocities.
Note that Eq. 44 can be rearranged as

sðvÞ =beff ¼ pðvÞ
2

1

Z N

dðv9 Þpðv9ÞÞ:
2

2

(47)

v

Here, the right-hand side is known experimentally from the histogram in Fig.
4 D. This equation shows how far the red data (‘‘parallel mean’’) take us
towards ﬁnding the appropriate model. The simple proportionality between
speed and mean acceleration that these data demonstrate, leads to the
assumption of a linear equation of the form Eq. 5. The latter immediately
gives the relationship in Eq. 7, which both conﬁrms that the form Eq. 5 is
appropriate and tells us how to determine beff experimentally. That done,
s(v) can then be determined experimentally from the histogram in Fig. 4 D.
The noise term assumed in Eq. 5 can be as general in form as allowed by
symmetries, i.e., it can be of the form used in the NHDF model. In that case it
is sk(v) that is determined in Eq. 47, whereas s?(v) still must be chosen from
a plot like Fig. 5 C.

APPENDIX B: SOME TECHNICAL DETAILS
The importance of being discrete
The effect of rounding experimental cell coordinates to the nearest pixel
coordinates was accounted for by doing the same to the models’ cell
coordinates: cell coordinates were modeled with real-valued numbers that
evolved continuously in real-valued time, when trajectories were simulated.
But simulated trajectories were time-lapse sampled exactly as in experiments. The sampled coordinate values were rounded to the nearest-integer
multiple of the pixel width used in the experiment with which we wanted to
compare.

FIGURE 10 Relative importance of ﬁnite pixel width in HaCaT theory,
demonstrated by comparing various functions measured with pixel width
0.85 mm (gray curves) with the same functions measured with vanishing
pixel width (black curves) in the exact same HaCaT theory. (A) Same

quantities as in Fig. 4 B. The values shown for the RMSD of the scatter
orthogonal to the velocity were shifted down to prevent collapse with RMSD
of scatter orthogonal to velocity. (B panels) Same quantities as in Fig. 4 C.
(C) Same quantity f(t) as in Fig. 4 E. (D) Same quantity p(v) as in Fig. 4 F.
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

930

Selmeczi et al.

FIGURE 12 Expectation value of ~
vj11 for given ~
vj ; projected onto the
~2j as
~j11 æ~vj  ~
vj =v
latter, and measured in units of the latter’s length, i.e., Æv
~j j: Here ~
vj and ~
vj11 are consecutive velocities computed from
function of jv
positions measured with 15-min time lapses; see Appendix A. In the OU
model, the quantity plotted here is constant, independent of speed. (A) Data
points are experimental values from HaCaT cell trajectories. Their
consistency with a constant value suggests a linear velocity dependence of
the noise-averaged acceleration in a HaCaT model. Thick curve surrounded
by two thin curves is the theoretical result for same quantity, 6 1 SD,
computed from HaCaT model in Eq. 6 ﬁtted to data shown in Fig. 4, B, E,
and F, and here. It’s small, but nonvanishing dependence on speed, is due to
a combination of time-lapse sampling and speed dependence of the model’s
noise term. (B) Data points are experimental values from NHDF cell
trajectories. Their distinct speed dependence suggests a nonlinear velocity
dependence of the acceleration in an NHDF model. Thick curve surrounded
by two thin curves is the theoretical result for same quantity, 6 1 SD,
computed from the NHDF model ﬁtted to data shown in Fig. 5, B, E, and F,
and here.

FIGURE 11 Relative importance of ﬁnite pixel width in NHDF data (gray
curves), demonstrated by comparison with exact same NHDF theory with
vanishing pixel width (black curves). (A) Same quantities as in Fig. 5 B. No
curves were shifted here. They are well separated by nature. (B panels) Same
quantities as in Fig. 5 C. (C) Same quantity f(t) as in Fig. 5 E. (D) Same
quantity p(v) as in Fig. 5 F.
Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

The relative importance of round-off errors varies, depending on which
quantity one considers. We determined this importance for all quantities
considered by recomputing all results for the ﬁtted theories, using coordinates that had not been rounded off. Both types of results were plotted on
top of each other for easy comparison; see Figs. 10 and 11.
Fig. 10 demonstrates the relative importance of round-off errors for the
HaCaT data. Results for the HaCaT theory ‘‘observed’’ with ﬁnite pixel
width are replotted on top of the same results for the very same theory,
observed with vanishing pixel width. Finite pixel width is seen to matter
most at low speeds, where round-off by a ﬁxed amount causes the largest
relative change. It does not affect the velocity autocorrelation function
discernibly. It affects the average acceleration as function of speed, as well

Cell Motility as Persistent Random Motion
as the two RMSDs of the acceleration’s components, as functions of speed.
The pattern seen in p(v) in panel D is the same as the pattern of vertical
stripes seen in Fig. 4 A.
Fig. 11 demonstrates the relative importance of ﬁnite pixel width in the
NHDF data. Compare with Fig. 10. We see the same dependence in the
importance here on the function considered and at which speed. But we
note that the mean acceleration of the theory observed unhampered by ﬁnite
pixel width actually is positive for speeds below 12 mm/h: NHDF cells
accelerate in a deterministic manner if moving slower than that, if we are to
believe this result. An indication that we are, is that we found the same
acceleration when the same trajectories were analyzed with 30-min time
lapse (not shown). By doing that, we reduced pixel round-off effects to
a negligible level.

931
Cell migration: integrating signals from front to back. Science. 302:
1704–1709.
8. Gaudet, C., W. A. Marganski, S. Kim, C. T. Brown, V. Gunderia, M.
Dembo, and J. Y. Wong. 2003. Inﬂuence of type I collagen surface
density on ﬁbroblast spreading, motility, and contractility. Biophys. J.
85:3329–3335.
9. Ponti, A., M. Machacek, S. L. Gupton, C. M. Waterman-Storer, and G.
Danuser. 2004. Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of
migrating cells. Science. 305:1782–1786.
10. Lauffenburger, D. A., and A. F. Horwitz. 1996. Cell migration: a
physically integrated molecular process. Cell. 84:359–369.
11. Joanny, J. F., F. Jülicher, and J. Prost. 2003. Motion of an adhesive gel
in a swelling gradient: a mechanism for cell locomotion.. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 90:168102.

A better window on b

12. Berg, H. C., and D. A. Brown. 1972. Chemotaxis in Escherichia coli
analysed by three-dimensional tracking. Nature. 239:500–504.

~=dtæ~v can be exhibited
The speed dependence of the mean acceleration Ædv
better than done in Figs. 4 B and 5 B. The acceleration plotted there is
~j j: Thus, the component parallel to ~
~j11  ~
vj Þ=Dt as function of vj ¼ jv
vj is
ðv
~j11  ~
vj = vj  vj Þ=Dt; and its average value for given value of vj is
ðv
~j11  ~
vj ævj =vj  vj Þ=Dt: Because the second term in this expression always
ðÆv
is proportional to vj, only the ﬁrst term is of real interest. Its speed
~j11  ~
vj ævj =v2j against vj. If this
dependence is brought out clearly in a plot of Æv
quantity is constant, as the case is for the HaCaT data shown in Fig. 12 A, we
limit our search for a model to models with acceleration proportional to the
velocity, a great simpliﬁcation. If it is not, as the case is for the NHDF data
shown in Fig. 12 B, we cannot make this simplifying assumption. Instead,
we must assume a more complex speed dependence of the acceleration in an
NHDF model. The less-than-perfect agreement between theory and data in
Fig. 12 B shows that there is room for improvement in the NHDF model we
landed on when we assumed that b(v) is not a constant, but a low-degree
polynomial in v, and demonstrated that a ﬁrst-degree polynomial describes
data as well as a second-degree polynomial does.

13. Berg, H. C. 2000. Motile behavior of bacteria. Phys. Today. 53:24–29.

We thank D. Bray, A. Czirok, T. A. J. Duke, F. Jülicher, N. Rozlosnik, H.
Thordal-Christensen, and S. Tolić-Nørrelykke for comments on the
manuscript at various stages. H.F. thanks S. F. Edwards for a pertinent
remark and Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences for
hospitality. D.S. thanks RISØ for hospitality.
D.S. thanks the Danish Research Agency’s Graduate School of Biophysics
and Tamás Vicsek for support. S.M. thanks the Graduate School of
Biophysics for support. N.B.L. thanks the Danish Technical Research
Council for support.

REFERENCES
1. Langer, R. S., and J. P. Vacanti. 1999. Tissue engineering: the
challenges ahead. Sci. Am. 280:86–89.
2. Hench, L. L., and J. M. Polak. 2002. Third-generation biomedical
materials. Science. 295:1014–1017.
3. Davis, M. E. 2002. Ordered porous materials for emerging applications. Nature. 417:813–821.
4. Magnani, A., A. Priamo, D. Pasqui, and R. Barbucci. 2003. Cell
behaviour on chemically microstructured surfaces. Mater. Sci. Eng. C.
23:315–328.

14. Berg, H. C. 2003. E. coli in Motion. Springer-Verlag, New York.
15. Gerbal, F., P. Chaikin, Y. Rabin, and J. Prost. 2000. An elastic analysis
of Listeria monocytogenes propulsion.. Biophys. J. 79:2259–2275.
16. Shenderov, A. D., and M. P. Sheetz. 1997. Inversely correlated cycles
in speed and turning in an ameba: an oscillatory model of cell locomotion. Biophys. J. 72:2382–2389.
17. Ornstein, L. S. 1919. On the Brownian motion. Proc. Amst. 21:96–108.
18. Fürth, R. 1920. Die Brownsche Bewegung bei Berücksichtigung einer
Persistenz der Bewegungsrichtung. Mit Anvendungen auf die
Bewegung lebender Infusorien. [in German]. Z. Physik. 2:244–256.
19. Gail, M. H., and C. W. Boone. 1970. The locomotion of mouse
ﬁbroblasts in tissue culture. Biophys. J. 10:980–993.
20. Dunn, G. A., and A. F. Brown. 1987. A uniﬁed approach to analysing
cell motility. J. Cell Sci. Suppl. 8:81–108.
21. Maheshwari, G., and D. A. Lauffenburger. 1998. Deconstructing (and
reconstructing) cell migration. Microsc. Res. Tech. 43:358–368.
22. Bergman, A. J., and K. Zygourakis. 1999. Migration of lymphocytes
on ﬁbronectin-coated surfaces: temporal evolution of migratory parameters. Biomaterials. 20:2235–2244.
23. Ionides, E. L., K. S. Fang, R. R. Isseroff, and G. F. Oster. 2004.
Stochastic models for cell motion and taxis. J. Math. Biol. 48:23–37.
24. Gadegaard, N., S. Mosler, and N. B. Larsen. 2003. Biomimetic
polymer nanostructures by injection molding. Macromol. Mater. Eng.
288:76–83.
25. Hartman, R. S., K. Lau, W. Chou, and T. D. Coates. 1994. The
fundamental motor of the human neutrophil is not random—
evidence for local non-Markov movement in neutrophils. Biophys. J.
67:2535–2545.
26. Uhlenbeck, G. E., and L. S. Ornstein. 1930. On the theory of Brownian
motion. Phys. Rev. 36:823–841.
27. Czirók, A., K. Schlett, E. Madarász, and T. Vicsek. 1998. Exponential
distribution of locomotion activity in cell cultures. Phys. Rev. Lett.
81:3038–3041.
28. Upadhyaya, A., J. P. Rieu, J. A. Glazier, and Y. Sawada. 2001.
Anomalous diffusion and non-Gaussian velocity distribution of Hydra
cells in cellular aggregates. Physica A. 293:549–558.
29. Thurner, S., N. Wick, R. Hanel, R. Sedivy, and L. Huber. 2003.
Anomalous diffusion on dynamical networks: a model for interacting
epithelial cell migration. Physica A. 320:475–484.

5. Sarikaya, M., C. Tamerler, A. K. Jen, K. Schulten, and F. Baneyx.
2003. Molecular biomimetics: nanotechnology through biology. Nat.
Mater. 2:577–585.
6. Verrier, S., J. J. Blaker, V. Maquet, L. L. Hench, and A. R. Boccaccini.
2004. PDLLA/Bioglass composites for soft-tissue and hard-tissue
engineering: an in vitro cell biology assessment. Biomaterials. 25:
3013–3021.

31. Pollard, T. D. 2003. The cytoskeleton, cellular motility and the
reductionist agenda. Nature. 422:741–745.

7. Ridley, A. J., M. A. Schwartz, K. Burridge, R. A. Firtel, M. H.
Ginsberg, G. Borisy, J. T. Parsons, and A. R. Horwitz. 2003.

33. Van Kampen, N. G. 2001. Stochastic Processes in Physics and
Chemistry. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

30. Chicurel, M. 2002. Cell migration research is on the move. Science.
295:606–609.

32. Karatzas, I., and S. E. Shreve. 1991. Brownian motion and stochastic
calculus, 2nd Ed. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.

Biophysical Journal 89(2) 912–931

