Source PDF: 419.full.pdf
Extracted text file: Stokes_1991.txt

Migration of individual microvessel endothelial cells: stochastic model and
parameter measurement

CYNTHIA L. STOKES*, DOUGLAS A. LAUFFENBURGER
Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

and STUART K. WILLIAMS
Department of Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA
* Author for correspondence at: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA

Summary

Analysis of cell motility effects in physiological
processes can be facilitated by a mathematical model
capable of simulating individual cell movement
paths. A quantitative description of motility of
individual cells would be useful, for example, in the
study of the formation of new blood vessel networks
in angiogenesis by microvessel endothelial cell
(MEC) migration. In this paper we propose a stochastic mathematical model for the random motility and
chemotaxis of single cells, and evaluate migration
paths of MEC in terms of this model. In our model,
cell velocity under random motility conditions is
described as a persistent random walk using the
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (O-U) process. Two parameters
quantify this process: the magnitude of random
movement accelerations, a, and a decay rate constant
for movement velocity, ft. Two other quantities often
used in measurements of individual cell random
motility properties - cell speed, S, and persistence
time in velocity, P v - can be defined in terms of the
fundamental stochastic parameters a and fi by:
S=V(a//J) and Pv=l//S. We account for chemotactic
cell movement in chemoattractant gradients by
adding a directional bias term to the O-U process.
The magnitude of the directional bias is characterized by the chemotactic responsiveness, K. A critical
advantage of the proposed model is that it can
generate, using experimentally measured values of a,
P and if, computer simulations of theoretical individual cell paths for use in evaluating the role of cell
migration in specific physiological processes.
We have used the model to assess MEC migration in
the presence or absence of the angiogenic stimulus
acidic fibroblast growth factor (aFGF). Time-lapse
video was used to observe and track the paths of cells
moving in various media, and the mean square
displacement was measured from these paths. To test

the validity of the model, we compared the mean
square displacement measurements of each cell with
model predictions of that displacement. The comparison indicates that the O-U process provides a
satisfactory description of the random migration at
this level of comparison. Using nonlinear regression
in these comparisons, we measured the magnitude of
random accelerations, a, and the velocity decay rate
constant, /?, for each cell path. We consequently
obtained values for the derived quantities, speed and
persistence time.
In control medium, we find that
a=250±100/nn 2 h- 3 and 'p=0.22±0.03h.-1, while in
stimulus medium
(control plus unpurified aFGF)
a=1900±720/nn2h-3 and /^O.DetO.STh-1. These results indicate that both random acceleration and
velocity decay rate are enhanced by aFGF. From the
perspective of the derived quantities,
cell speed is
increased (from 25 to 42/nnh"1) but persistence time
is decreased (from 5.4 to 2.9 h) by this chemical
stimulus. These results suggest that the intracellular
mechanisms that control rate of movement of MEC
may be different from those that control movement
direction. We also estimated a value for the chemotactic responsiveness K by relating computer-simulated cell paths to previous measurements of population chemotactic migration
in aFGF gradients. A
value Kao=2400/an2h~2, where a,, is the source
attractant concentration, was obtained for the
chemotactic responsiveness. The ratio of chemotactic to random
migration, represented by wa^/
(,a/P)=Ka/S2, is approximately 1.5, demonstrating
that MEC display a numerically significant degree of
directional sensitivity to aFGF.

Introduction

of motility is clear. Only quantitative assessment will
provide the basis for objective comparisons between motile
cell types and migration under various environmental
conditions, as well as provide a rational framework for
elucidating the underlying biochemical mechanisms of

Cell migration, including directed taxis, is a phenomenon
exhibited by many cell types in numerous physiological
processes. The need for rigorous, quantitative evaluation
Journal of Cell Science 99, 419-430 (1991)
Printed in Great Britain © The Company of Biologists Limited 1991

Key words: random motility, chemotaxis, migration,
endothelial cell, microvessel, angiogenesis, stochastic.

419

cell locomotion. Dunn and Brown (1987) have previously
discussed at great length this need for quantitative
evaluation of motility, as well as the desired features of
measured quantities. The most appropriate measurements for the evaluation of motility and/or taxis in
particular situations may vary, given the wide spectrum of
cell types and physiological contexts. In this work we
address those systems in which individual cell trajectories
appear to be the descriptive level of greatest relevance.
One such instance is the encounter and destruction of
foreign targets by white blood cells in the immune and
inflammatory host defense responses. Another is the
development of new microvascular networks by microvessel endothelial cells (MEC) during angiogenesis.
In this paper we propose a stochastic mathematical
model for random motility and chemotaxis of single cells.
This model allows simulation of individual cell migration
paths, and we have used it elsewhere to analyze the role of
migration of MEC in angiogenesis (Stokes and Lauffenburger, 1991). Our approach to modeling and simulation of
cell trajectories is through phenomenological analogy to
Brownian motion of molecules and inert particles. Clearly,
the fundamental mechanisms by which cells move over
two-dimensional surfaces or through three-dimensional
matrices are radically different from the thermal motion
of molecules. Nevertheless, observation of the motility of
individual cells reveals comparable random walk-like
behavior, indicating a similar stochastic nature and
suggesting that a related mathematical description might
suffice. Correspondingly, Dunn and Brown (1987) have
proposed using the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (O-U) process,
traditionally used to describe Brownian motion (Uhlenbeck and Ornstein, 1930; Doob, 1942), to quantify
individual cell random motility. The O-U process describes
the velocity of a particle in terms of two processes:
stochastic fluctuations in velocity (speed or direction, or
both), and deterministic resistance to the current velocity.
The stochastic term encompasses all of the probabilistic
processes that might affect cell velocity (e.g. random
fluctuations in motile sensing and response mechanisms,
thermal noise). The deterministic term represents the
decay of the current velocity, providing susceptibility to
the random fluctuations and affecting persistence of the
motion. Dunn and Brown utilized a discrete description of
the O-U process to analyze the motility of chick heart
fibroblasts. Using statistical analysis of the autocorrelation functions of cell displacements during discrete time
intervals, they demonstrated that this process successfully
characterizes fibroblast random motility. Their results
support the use of the O-U process as a model of cell
motility. In the present work, we extend the approach of
Dunn and Brown: first by using a continuous version of the
O-U process; and second, by adding a directional bias term
for cell movement in a chemoattractant gradient. We
apply our extended model to analyze experimental data of
MEC migrating in response to uniform concentrations and
concentration gradients of the angiogenic stimulus acidic
fibroblast growth factor (aFGF).
We begin by describing the continuous version of the 0U process and our extension that provides a description of
chemotaxis. Analysis of the statistical properties of this OU process reveals that the two parameters characterizing
random fluctuations and velocity decay (a and /3, respectively) are explicitly related to two commonly used and
easily interpretable average cell movement quantities speed, S, and persistence time in velocity, Pv. Speed and
persistence time have also been defined in earlier
420

C. L. Stokes et al.

probabilistic models for cell motility (Alt, 1980; Dunn,
1983; Othmer et al. 1988; Rivero et al. 1989). We validate
our model's applicability to MEC random migration, and
measure a and /3 (and consequently obtain S and Pv) for
migration in several chemical environments, including
aFGF. An additional parameter, the chemotactic responsiveness, K, is introduced to account for directed motion of
the cell in response to a chemical concentration gradient, K
could not be measured directly for individual MEC
because detectable aFGF concentration gradients could
not be sustained over the length of time (several days)
necessary to obtain statistically meaningful cell path
lengths for these slowly moving cells. However, we have
previously demonstrated using the under-agarose assay,
that MEC populations exhibit a significant chemotactic
response to aFGF and we have measured the population
chemotaxis coefficient, % (Stokes et al. 1990). We show here
that we can estimate a value of the chemotactic responsiveness for individual cells, K, from the population
chemotaxis coefficient, x> using model-generated cell
paths. What our model implies about the nature of cell
motility is addressed in the Discussion.
Materials and methods
Cell isolation and culture
Human subcutaneous adipose tissue was obtained from human
donors according to our Institutional Review Board protocol. The
cells were isolated using the procedure of Wagner and Matthews
(1975) as modified by Williams (1987). The cultures were
incubated at 37 °C in a humidified, 5 % CO2 atmosphere. Cultures
were fed three times per week with medium consisting of medium
199 with Earle's salts (M199; Gibco, Grand Island, New York),
10 % heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, Hazelton, Denver,
Pennsylvania), 1.5 mM L-glutamine, 20/igml" 1 of unpurified
aFGF, and 90/ygmT 1 heparin (porcine, Sigma; Thornton et al.
1983) (culture medium), and split at confluence using 0.25 % (w/v)
trypsin with 0.09% ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid in normal
saline. Cells used during the assays did not exceed two passages.
Cell cultures were analyzed for the presence and distribution of
factor VTII-related antigen using the materials and methods of
the Dako Peroxidase-Antiperoxidase Kit (Santa Barbara, California). Cultures that expressed factor Vm-related antigen were
used in the studies.

Single-cell migration assay
Tissue culture polystyrene Petri dishes (35 mm; Corning Glass
Works, Corning, New York) were pretreated with a 1% gelatin
solution in 0.9 % NaCl overnight, and washed with Medium 199.
A confluent culture of MEC was removed from a T25 culture flask
with trypsin as above, and resuspended in a final volume of 2 ml of
M199 containing 10 % FBS. One to two drops (~0.2 ml) of the
suspension were added to 4 ml assay medium and plated in a
pretreated Petri dish. Assay medium was made by diluting 10 x
concentrated M199 with Earle's salts (does not contain NaHCO3)
to l x with distilled water and adding 0.1% BSA and 10 mM
Hepes. pH was corrected to 7.4 with NaOH, and the osmolarity
was corrected by replacing the missing NaHCOa with NaCl. The
cell density was approximately 400 cells cm"2. The cells were
allowed to settle and attach to the dish surface for at least two
hours prior to videotaping.
Pre-formed agarose overlays were used in some experiments to
create the same environment as we have previously used in the
under-agarose assay for population migration measurements
(Rupnick et al. 1988; Stokes et al. 1990). Overlays were formed by
pouring a warm (40°C) solution of 0.5 % agarose (Sigma) in assay
medium into an untreated Petri dish and allowing it to gel. After
the MEC in a second dish were attached, the medium in the dish
was aspirated until only a very thin film of fluid remained on the
cells. The gelled agarose block was carefully removed from the

first Petri dish by lifting it with a Pasteur pipet tip and laid onto
the cells in the second dish. Several drops of medium were placed
onto the agarose to prevent drying and to fill in around the edges.
The use of agarose overlays was discontinued because the top of
the agarose became pitted with time, marring the video image
and making image analysis difficult.
The medium or agarose in a Petri dish to be used was covered
with 2 ml of light mineral oil (Sigma) to protect the assay from
environmental contaminants, while allowing for the flow of air
across the dish and not impeding the optics of the microscope. The
Petri dish was placed in a warmed Leiden chamber (Ince et al.
1983), a type of microscope stage incubator with a temperature
controller, and the temperature was maintained at 37 °C in the
dish. Filtered compressed air was blown across the surface of the
liquid through the ports in the chamber to help maintain a
constant temperature across the radius by convection.
The cells were observed with phase-contrast optics on a Nikon
Diaphot inverted microscope (Nikon Inc., Garden City, New
York). A video camera (DAGE-MTI Inc., Michigan City, Indiana)
was attached to the microscope, leading to a time-lapse video
recorder (JVC model BR-9000U). A single field was taped for up to
72 h using time-lapse at 1/240 real time; 15-20 cells per field were
present.

Measurement of cell trajectories and mean square
displacement
Cell movement was tracked with the Imaging Technologies, Inc.,
Series 151 image analysis system using software subroutines
provided by Mnemonics, Inc. (Camden, New Jersey). The centroid
of the cell area was considered to represent the cell position. The
time increment between locating cells was chosen as 1 h. This was
long enough to discern forward movement, but almost never more
than a cell body length. The result was a series of (x j ) positions
with time for each cell. The net displacement during the ith l h
increment, a\, was calculated by difference of position at the
beginning and end of that time step. The mean square
displacement, (D 2 ), for l h time increments was then calculated
by:

the presence of a chemoattractant gradient. The random walk
now becomes a biased random walk. In this model of directional
bias, we assume that the cell effectively responds to a spatial
gradient of bound receptors across its surface, although we make
no statement about the cell's actual underlying mechanism of
perception (see, for example, Lauffenburger et al. 1988). We also
assume that the effect of a chemical gradient on cell velocity
change increases as the cell is directed further down the gradient.
This form is based on previous findings on chemotaxis in
leukocytes, though little data are available to indicate whether
MEC behave in the same way.
We now describe the details of the mathematical model. One
equation (equation (2)) describes the velocity (rate of movement
and direction) of a single model cell as it evolves with time. A
second equation (equation (3)) is then used to determine the cell's
position from its velocity, resulting in a calculated trajectory for
the model cell. From these equations, the mean square displacement of a cell with the model characteristics can be calculated
(equations (5) and (6)). We compare the predicted mean square
displacement from the model with that measured from MEC cell
paths as explained above to: (1) examine the validity of the model,
and (2) determine values of the model parameters for the MEC
migration.
The geometry of our system is illustrated m Fig. 1. The rate of
change of cell velocity in our model is the sum of three
components: the first two components represent the random
motility behavior, and the third represents the chemotactic, or
directed, behavior. For random motility, the first term describes

Attractant
Source

\
\

where N is the total number of increments measured of 1 h length
for the path. Additional series of displacement for longer time
increments (2h, 3h, etc.), da,. d3h, etc. were also calculated from
the data by differences of positions at the beginnings and ends of
these longer time increments. (D2) was again calculated for these
longer time increments using equation (1). To use the data
maximally, means were determined from overlapping time
intervals (e.g. 0-2 h, 1-3 h, 2—4 h, etc. for the 2 h time increment)
for time increments larger than 1 h, the smallest interval. These
calculations gave a series of (D 2 ) values for increasing values of
the time increment T.

Cell Path

Mathematical model
We analyze the cell motility in terms of a stochastic mathematical
model. As noted in the Introduction, the model is the OrnsteinUhlenbeck process for random motility, modified to account for
the directional bias caused by sensitivity to chemoattractant
gradients. The O-U process is the simplest type of continuous,
autocorrelated, random motion process. It describes a Markov
process, meaning that the motion at a given time depends only on
the current state of the cell and not on earlier states. That is, there
is no memory to the motion, and later steps are not correlated to
earlier steps. While this seems very simple, Dunn and Brown
(1987) showed that, at least for fibroblasts, this simple Markov
process is sufficient to describe cell random motility. We chose the
O-U process because it is the simplest stochastic model that can
describe the random motility process as a persistent random walk,
and there was no reason a priori to choose a more complicated
stochastic equation. The implications of this model for the nature
of cell motility are addressed further in the Discussion. We
expand our random motility model, the O-U process, to account
also for the directional bias in velocity caused by a cell reacting to

Fig. 1. Geometry for two-dimensional model of cell migration.
R is the radius of the attractant source, a,, is the concentration
of the source (a constant), 6 is the angle the cell is moving
measured from the positive x-axis, and <p is the angle between
the direction the cell is moving and the direction of the
steepest gradient (here, directly towards the attractant source).
In this figure, a model cell is shown where it started, at the
origin. The angle <p can be calculated by:
«-*)cosS-rCya-y)sine
where d^Va) are the coordinates of the center of the chemical
attractant source, also written in vector form as £„, and {xj)
are the coordinates of the cell, also written in vector form as £.

Endothelial cell migration model

421

We define *r as the chemotactic responsiveness. It is related,
though probably not in a trivial way, to the cell population
chemotaxis coefficient, % (Tranquillo et al. 1988; Farrell et al.
1990; Stokes et al. 1990).
Equations (2) and (4) provide a description of the velocity
process of a single cell moving with the average properties
represented by the random motility parameters a and fi and the
chemotaxis parameter K. Each cell described by equation (2) with
dOit) = - fSO(t)dt + VadWit) +
ty(t)dt
(2) a given set of parameters, a', fi and K, has a different path or
trajectory (owing to different realizations of the random noise
change in _ resistance
random
chemotactic
process, W) but the same 'degree' of randomness, velocity decay
velocity
to motion
fluctuations
bias
'
rate constant, and sensitivity to attractant gradients. Thus, our
modified O-U process provides a quantitative framework in which
where a and fi are motility parameters, t is time, W is the vector
to interpret cell motility. For this framework to be meaningful, we
Weiner process (a white noise function), and ty is the drift
must first demonstrate that it is a valid description of actual cell
function, which describes the effect of an attractant gradient on
trajectories. If shown, we can utilize this framework to obtain
the velocity. A functional form for ty appropriate to chemotactic
values for the parameters a, fi and K, which then provide a
cell movement will be derived below. The tildes (~) over the
quantitative description of the characteristics of the actual cell's
variables v, t/> and W indicate that the velocity occurs in more than
intrinsic motility properties.
one dimension (it is a vector process). W, the white noise, is simply
an idealized random process that has the mathematical property
that W(t) — W(s) has a Gaussian distribution with a mean of zero Determination of random motility parameters
and a spectrum (loosely speaking, the variance) of o)f|.
The first level of validation of the model is to show that pertinent
average properties of the model are the same as those of real cells.
Because cell velocity is rate of change of position of the cell, we
This is the level we demonstrate in the present work. For our
can obtain the position of a cell, £, by integrating the velocity with
model, the pertinent property is the expected square displacement
time t:
of a cell, (Zr>=£{[£(D-i(0)] 2 }, where T is the time increment in
(3)
(Kt')dt'.
which the displacement took place. A cell moving for a time T is
expected to be displaced from its starting point by the net distance
Carrying out this integration will yield an actual cell path for the
D. Using equations (2) and (3) for C and £, Doob (1942) derived the
cell migrating with the velocity given by equation (2) (e.g. see
following expression for expected square displacement (Z)2) for
Fig. 4, below).
random motility (l?'=0) for the one-dimensional O-U process:
We can see from equation (2) that the velocity process for
random motility (when 1l'=0) is characterized by two parameters:
(5)
a represents the magnitude of the random fluctuations, and fi
represents the rate constant for decay of the current velocity. We
This states that a migrating cell that can be described by the
can view fi as the magnitude of the resistance to the motion, or the
parameter values a and fi, and moving for a duration T, is
magnitude of susceptibility of the motion to the random
expected to be displaced by the distance D. By the Pythagorean
fluctuations, leading to a decrease of persistence in velocity as fi
theorem, the right-hand side of equation (5) is multiplied by 2 or 3
increases in value. We emphasize that for cell movement these
for migration in two or three dimensions, respectively. We
fluctuations are not the same as the thermal fluctuations leading
compare the model to actual cell migration by making experimento molecular Brownian motion, but rather are due to intrinsic
tal
measurements of (D 2 ) versus T as explained above, and
cellular mechanisms such as receptor-binding fluctuations (Trancomparing
the experimental curve to that given by equation (5)
quillo and Lauffenburger, 1987).
with various values of a and fi. In practice, nonlinear regression
The drift function V in equation (2) provides the directional
using the IMSL subroutine ZXSSQ is used to match equation (5)
bias in velocity caused by a cell reacting to the presence of an
to the data and thereby obtain the values of the parameters that
attractant gradient. We assume that the cell effectively responds
best describe the data.
to a spatial gradient of bound receptors, VA^, across its surface,
To relate these fundamental parameters (a-and fi) to previously
although we make no statement about the cell's actual underlying
denned and perhaps more intuitive quantities, we define two new
mechanism of perception (see, for example, Lauffenburger et al.
parameters, the speed, S, and persistence time, Pv. These are not
1988). The gradient of bound receptors will necessarily be
new, independent parameters, but as a pair contain the same
dependent on the size of the attractant gradient in the medium,
information as the pair <rand fi. The speed of the cell is a measure
Vo. The gradient of bound receptors is equal to the attractant
of the magnitude of the velocity, or its rate of movement. S
gradient times the change in bound receptor number per unit
contains no directional information. The persistence time is a
change in attractant concentration (e.g. ViVb=Va dNb/da).
measure of persistence in velocity, or the average time a cell
Assuming that the bound receptor number increases linearly with
maintains a given velocity. P v contains information on both
attractant concentration in the concentration range of interest,
direction and rate of movement. Doob (1942) calculated that the
we can absorb the latter term (dNb/da) into a proportionality
expected square speed for random motility (no chemotaxis, ty=Q)
constant. In practice this is necessary, since experimental
for the velocity process in equation (2): is (s 2 ) =naj1fi, where n is
information regarding this function for endothelial cells is sparse.
the dimension of the motion.
We also assume that the effect of a chemical gradient on cell
The most obvious definition of a characteristic speed, S, is thus
velocity change increases as the cell moves farther down gradient.
the root mean square speed ((s 2 )'): S=(<v//5)' (in two dimensions,
The simplest way to incorporate this is to let the drift function "I*
be proportional to sin|#/2|, where 4> is the angle between the rc=2). The appropriate definition of persistence time is not as
obvious, but can be deduced by examining the meaning of the
direction in which the cell is currently migrating and the
parameter fi. To reiterate, fi is the decay rate constant of the
direction towards the steepest attractant gradient (see Fig. 1).
current velocity. Small fi means little resistance to the motion or
This idea is consistent with the data of Nossal and Zigmond (1976)
little susceptibility to random fluctuations, which will result in
for polymorphonuclear leukocytes showing that turn angles
increased linearly as the angle <p increased. Thus, introducing K greater time spent at the same velocity. Conversely, large fi
means great resistance to the motion and hence less persistence, fi
as the proportionality constant gives:
has dimensions of time" 1 , and so its inverse, 1/ fi, should be a
measure of the time of persistence in velocity, Pv. This definition
"I* = Wasin
(4)
of P v as persistence in motion (both direction and magnitude of
the velocity) is similar to the persistence time denned by Rivero et
al. (1989) in their cell population model derivation. Othmer et al.
chemotactic _ chemotactic
attractant
orientation
(1988), Alt (1980) and Dunn (1983) all defined persistence time as
bias
~ responsiveness gradient size in gradient'

the deterministic resistance to the cell's motion, and the second
represents the random accelerations or fluctuations of the
movement. The third component that describes the chemotactic
behavior provides a directional bias in the presence of an
attractant gradient. Mathematically, these three components are
summed to give the following stochastic differential equation for
the rate of change of the cell velocity, 6:

-J:

422

C. L. Stokes et al.

persistence in direction only, with definitions of cell speed similar
to ours.
For two-dimensional movement, substitution of /3=l/P v and
a^SP/Py into equation (5) gives an expression for the expected
squared displacement, (.D2), in terms of S and Pv:
(D 2 )^ 2 ^ 2

i-

(6)

Though S and Py are derived quantities based on the parameters
a and /3, we will report results primarily in terms of S and Pv
because of their more appealing definitions. We emphasize,
however, that the fundamental parameters defined in the model
are those giving the magnitude of fluctuations and velocity decay
rate or resistance to motion; that is, a and /}.
The motility properties of single cells can be used to predict the
dispersive properties of a population of like cells (e.g. in an underagarose assay or filter assay). A quantitative measure of the
random migration of cell populations is the random motility
coefficient, n, previously defined in population migration models
(Keller and Segel, 1971; Alt, 1980); n is analogous to the diffusion
coefficient for molecular diffusion, and has dimensions of
distance2time~1; /(is related to S and Pv by:
(7)
n
for migration in n dimensions. Equation (7) is used below to
calculate [a from our determined values of S and P v . Calculated
values are compared with previous direct measurements of \i from
MEC population experiments (Rupnick et al. 1988; Stokes et al.
1990) to see how well measurements from individual MEC predict
population behavior.
Determination of chemotactic responsiveness
Values for the chemotactic responsiveness K were found using
computer simulation of cell paths according to equations (2)-(4),
and comparing measurements from these paths with measurements of MEC chemotaxis in the under-agarose assay reported
elsewhere (Stokes et al. 1990). More precisely, we determined
values of the parameter grouping KUO/(O//S), which contains the
chemotactic responsiveness K, and a0 is the attractant concentration at the attractant source (see Fig. 1). We call this grouping
<5, the dimensionless chemotactic responsiveness. This grouping
emerges from dimensional analysis of the equations as shown in
the Appendix.
To determine values of the dimensionless chemotactic responsiveness, <5, statistics of the simulations were compared with
experimental results from Stokes et al. (1990) for MEC migration
in gradients of aFGF. First, theoretical cell paths were simulated
for various values of chemotactic responsiveness. For a given
path, this is done by numerically calculating a realization of
velocity, 0, for a given realization of the noise process, W, for some
length of time using equations (2) and (4). This process is
described in the Appendix. Then the position of the cell, £, is
calculated using equation (3). Examples of simulated cell paths
are shown in Fig. 4 (below).
Sets of 100 cell paths were calculated for 6=0 (no chemotactic
response), 0.1, 0.3, 1.0 and 3.0 (increasing responses) using
different realizations of the random noise (W) for each path. The
chemotactic index, CI, was calculated for each path. CI is most
simply defined as the net distance travelled towards an attractant
source or target divided by the total distance travelled (McCutcheon, 1946). It can be written approximately either in terms of
cell velocities: CI= |0 c |/S (where 0c is the chemotactic velocity, the
component in the direction of attractant due to bias); or in terms of
distances: CI=(net distance travelled up the gradient)/(total
distance travelled). Othmer et al. (1988) have derived an
expression for CI that takes into account the effect of finite
persistence time compared to the total time of one's measurement.
The correction is small if the total time is much greater than
persistence time, as was the case in our simulations, and thus this
correction was ignored. Experimentally estimated values of CI
can be calculated because 0c can also be denned in terms of a
previously measured parameter for chemotaxis, the chemotaxis
coefficient x- This is denned in the cell motility model of Alt

(1980), and quantifies the net drift of a cell population due to
directionally biased movement in an attractant gradient. Rivero
et al. (1989) have derived the relation: 0c=^Va, so C l ^ V a / S . This
relation has been verified experimentally by Farrell et al. (1990)
for alveolar macrophages responding to C5a. In our case, % has
been measured for migration of MEC in aFGF gradients (Stokes et
al. 1990). To estimate 6, then, we compared the CI measured from
many simulated cell paths to that calculated from the experimental values of x using CI=^Va/S. The value at which the predicted
and calculated values of CI agree is the one for which 8 predicts
individual cell paths with the same directed component as that
measured in the cell population experiments.

Results
Cell trajectories
Several typical cell paths for cells migrating in assay
medium are shown in Fig. 2. The paths reveal that MEC
generally travel with smooth trajectories, and that they
persist in a given direction for a time on the order of hours.
The duration of all paths obtained ranged from 18 to 51 h.
While a field was typically taped for 72 h, no cell paths
could be traced for that long because the cells either moved
off screen or collided with other cells. The occasional cell
that did not move was ignored in this study.
These paths represent the movement of the centroid of
the cell area. For these slowly moving cells in which
direction changes are infrequent and smooth, the variable
selected to represent cell position (area centroid, nuclear
area centroid, dry mass centroid etc.) is not expected to be
of much importance. For faster cells that display pronounced lamellipodia, however, this choice may be of more
significance. For some cells such as leukocytes it is
common to see a new protrusion of the cytoplasm in a new
direction while the nucleus continues temporarily in the
previous direction of cell movement. One's choice of
definition of position must therefore be carefully examined. For example, Brown and Dunn (1989) have compared
the changes in spread area and total dry mass of migrating
chick heart fibroblasts.
2.00

0.00
0.00

2.00

Fig. 2. Sample cell paths for cells migrating in assay medium.
Labels by each path denote the duration of the path.
Endothelial cell migration model

423

Applicability of model for random motility
The predictions of the model were compared with
experimental measurements using plots of mean square
displacement versus time increment. In Fig. 3, the mean
square displacement, (Z)2), is plotted against time
increment T for both the experimental data (continuous
curve) and a curve calculated from equation (6) (broken
curve) using the best S and P v values obtained from
nonlinear regression of the data. The two examples in the
figure illustrate that MEC migration paths follow a
function of the form of equation (6) very closely for small to
intermediate values of T (compared to the full duration of
the cell path). As seen there, the data can become
unpredictable for large time increments for which (D 2 ) is
the average of only a few points (T approaching the full
duration of the cell path). This is to be expected, because at
longer time increments there are fewer and fewer
displacement increments to average. For instance, at T
equal to the full duration of the cell path, there is only one
point, whereas for T = l h there are many increments.
Because of this phenomenon, values of S and P v reported
•

1

1

|

.

.

.

1

|

1

1

i

i

1

i

i

i

i

!

i

• A
400000

300000 y
200000 -

100000 -

-

/
, , , 1 , i , , 1 , , i

0

10

20

• 1 . . . .

30

40

1 ."

50

T(h)

•

B

60000 -

40000 /

^

-

20000 -

10

20

30

r(h)
%. 3. Examples of experimental mean squared displacement
(£r) as a function of time increment (T) (
) compared with
that predicted from equation (6) (
) for two cells migrating
in control medium with an agarose overlay. The predicted
curves have the following values of S and P v : (A) S=5
P v =12.7h. (B)S=15.6^mh" 1 , P T =5.1h.

424

C. L. Stokes et al.

here are calculated from the experimental data (D 2 ) vs T
for T up to half the total duration of the path. All paths
observed showed agreement between experimental data
and the model similar to that in the examples in Fig. 3 for
T up to or greater than this value.
Speed and persistence time
a and /3, and consequently S and P v , were determined for
MEC migrating in assay medium (no stimulants or
inhibitors) both with and without agarose overlays. The
results are given in Table 1 for both sets of parameters.
The data consist of evaluations of 10 cell paths with
overlays and 8 without. With the agarose overlay, the
average cell speed is S=16.4±1.3 jtmh" 1 (mean±standard
error). Without the overlay, S=29.6±5.5 jtmh" 1 , significantly different from the former value (P<0.02). In the
latter group, one cell in particular (number 14) lies far
outside the range of two standard deviations of the mean,
with a speed of 63/tmh" 1 . If cell 14 is removed from the
average, S=24.9±2.8;anh~ 1 . This remains significantly
different from S with the agarose overlay (P<0.01). The
average persistence time for the migration with agarose
Without
overlays,
overlays
is
P v =6.0±1.0h.
P v =5.4±1.0h, not significantly different from the former
group. With cell 14 removed, P v =5.5±1.0h, again not
significantly different. These data indicate that the
agarose overlay hindered the speed of the cells, though it
had no effect on the persistence time.
S and P v were also evaluated for seven cells migrating
in culture medium containing unpurified aFGF, heparin
and FBS. These data are given in Table 2. For these cells,
S=41.6±4.8/anh~ 1 and P v =2.9±l.lh. These values are
significantly different than those for motility, both with
overlays (for S, P<0.01; for P v , P<0.1) and without (for S,
P<0.02; for P v , P<0.1). This result indicates that the rate
of movement of the cells is increased while the persistence
time is decreased, compared to control. If persistence time
is loosely interpreted in terms of persistence in direction
only (constant speed), then an interesting result of
increasing one parameter (here SO while decreasing the
other (Pv) is to maintain the mean free path of a cell (the
length of a 'straight' segment) approximately constant.
The mean free path equals the rate of movement times the
time the cell moves in one direction, or SPV.
We have provided the data for the individual cells in
Tables 1 and 2 as well as the means in order to
demonstrate the variability exhibited by MEC in both
speed and persistence time when migrating in a given
environment. The relative variation in persistence time
within a group was somewhat greater than that for speed.
Several factors contribute to the variability in addition to
natural variation among cells. First, the length of time a
cell path is observed limits the accuracy to which its speed
and persistence time can be determined. The more
multiples of persistence time a cell is observed, the more
accurate will be the evaluation of S and P v . The length of
time a given cell can be observed is constrained by
experimental factors including cell-cell collisions and
cells moving out of the field of view. In addition, the
greater variability in P v at least partly results from the
functional dependence on P v in equation (6). The curves
predicted from equation (6) are less sensitive to P v than to
S (that is, P v can vary over a larger range them S with less
change in the (D2) versus Tcurve (Fig. 3)) so the values of
P v reported are more sensitive to tracking error than is S.
The values of the fundamental motility parameters a
and /S are also given in Tables 1 and 2 for each cell. The

Table 1. Single cell motility parameters for MEC migrating in control medium with and without agarose overlays
Duration
Cell

/ixlO9

P (h"1)

SOnnh" 1 )

P»(h)

34.9
22.8
59.4
106.0
88.3
23.2
14.6
34.7
304.0
47.4
73.6±27.3

0.18
0.19
0.18
0.29
0.27
0.15
0.10
0.08
0.56
0.19
0.22±0 04

13.8
10.8
18.0
19.2
18.0
12.6
12.0
21.0
23.4
15.6
16.4±1.3f

5.5
5.1
5.5
3.5
3.7
6.8
9.9

134.0
61.8
50.5
902.0
213.0
423.0
193.0
30.5
251±103
158±48 4

0.26
0.13
0.09
0.23
0.28
0.34
0.21
0.21
0.22±0.02
0.22±0.03

23.4
21.6
23.4
63.0
27.6
35.4
30.6
12.0
29.6±5.5t
24.9±2.8t

(h)

(cmV1)

Duration/
Pr

With agarose overlays
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

48
33
36
39
47
47
47
51
51
33

Mean±s.E.M.

1.4

0.83

1.8
5.1

2.5
1.8
1.7
1.5
2.0
7.8
1.4
1.7

6.0±1.0t

2.3±0 6

4.1
7.6

3.1
4.9
8.3

12.7

8.8
6.4
6.6

11.3
12.8
6.9
4.8
4.0

28.4
6.5

Without agarose overlays
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

22
25
42
18
40
35
19
33

Mean±s.K.M.
Without cell 14*

10.9

24.0

4.4
3.6
3.0
4.9
4.7

3.8
5.1
6.3

5.4±1.0t
5.5±1.0t

0.94
6.9±2.6
4.6±0.9

5.4
3.3
3.9
4.1

11.2
11.9
3.9
7.0

a- and /3 are the magnitude of random fluctuations and velocity decay rate constant, respectively, defined in equation (1). S and Py are the speed and
persistence time, which are denned in terms of a and fi (see Materials and methods). \x is the random motility coefficient calculated from equation (7)
for each cell. Duration indicates the time a cell path was tracked.
•Cell 14 has values of a and, equivalently, speed that are more than two standard deviations outside the mean.
tThe values of (a,fS) and (SJ*V) were determined for each cell. The mean value for each parameter in one experimental condition was then
calculated from the values for the group of cells observed in that condition. That explains why the means of a and /} do not equal SP/P* and 1/PV,
respectively, when the mean S and Pv values are used.

Table 2. Single cell motility parameters for MEC migrating in culture medium containing aFGF, heparin and fetal
calf serum
Duration
Cell

(h)

o-(^m2h 3)

1

23
29
9
13
9
30
18

1250

2
3
4

6
6
7

Mean±8.B . M .

186
829
206

1340
7850
1660
1900±720

/JXIO 9

0.32
0.12
0.60
0.21
0.97
2.63
2.08
0.99±0.37

Sitimh ')

Py (h)

(™J«"')

63.0
39.6
37.2
31.2
37.2
64.6
28.2
41.6±4.8*

3.2
8.5
17
4.7
1.0
0.4
0.6

17.4
18.5

2.9±1.1»

7.1±2.7

3.2
6.4

2.0
1.6
053

Duration/
P,
7.3
3.4
54
28

8.7
78.3
37.2

a and /J are the magnitude of random fluctuations and velocity decay rate constant, respectively, defined in equation (1). S and PT are the speed and
persistence time, which are denned in terms of a and p (see Materials and methods), yi is the random motility coefficient calculated from equation (7)
for each cell. Duration indicates the time a cell path was tracked.
•The values of (a,p) and (S/"v) were determined for each cell. The mean value for each parameter in one experimental condition was then
calculated from the values for the group of cells observed in that condition. That is why the means of a and fi do not equal &*/P, and 1/PT,
respectively, when the mean S and P, values are used.

magnitude of random fluctuations, a, which is related to
cell speed and not to persistence time (recall S=V(a//S)
and P v =l//S), changed with the addition of the agarose
overlay. The velocity decay rate constant, fi, is apparently
not affected (since P v was constant). The addition of aFGF
affects both the randomness and velocity decay rate, with
both a and fi increasing.
More cell paths were tracked than appear in Tables 1
and 2, but the tracks were of too short a duration to
analyze in terms of this mathematical model. The analysis
to obtain S and P v is only appropriate when the cell paths
are measured for at least several persistence times. At the
extreme, for instance, if the cell is moving at constant
speed and is followed for less than a full persistence time
then the track is essentially straight and the analysis
would predict that Pv=oo. Clearly this is incorrect and is

only obtained because no turns were made in that section
of path. While not quite so drastic, if the path is followed
for only a couple of persistence times, Pv will still be
incorrectly large because the true tortuosity is not
captured in the data. Therefore, in the data reported in
Tables 1 and 2 only paths that are at least three times the
duration of the predicted Pv (duration/P v >3) were kept.
Random motility coefficient
The value of the random motility coefficient, fi, was
calculated from equation (7) for each cell track as given in
Tables 1 and 2. To reiterate, (i is analogous to the diffusion
coefficient, and quantifies the rate at which a cell
population will disperse or spread. For migration in
control medium, the mean value of n is 2.3±0.6xl0~ 9
c m 2 s - 1 with agarose overlays and 6.9±2.6xl0" 9 cm 2 s~ 1
Endothelial cell migration model

425

without overlays (mean calculated from values of ji, not
from means of S and Pv). Again, if cell 14 is eliminated (it
has /i=2.4xlO" 8 cm 2 s" 1 , about five times the mean), the
mean without overlays is 4.6±0.9xl0~ 9 cm 2 s" 1 . These
values are similar to JX values previously determined
directly from population migration experiments in assay
medium in the linear under-agarose assay. In that assay,
the random motility coefficient was about 5xlO~ 9 cm 2 s~
for several MEC lines isolated from human subcutaneous
fat (Stokes et al. 1990).
As shown in Table 2, while S increased and P v decreased
in culture medium compared to assay medium, the
random motility coefficient increased: /i=7.1±2.7xlO~ 9
cm 2 s" 1 . While we have not measured n directly for
population migration in culture medium, we have done so
for migration in aFGF with and without heparin in assay
medium (Stokes et al. 1990). The calculated value of \i from
S and P v is very similar to that in aFGF at 10~10 to 10~8M
with 1/igml
heparin, where /i=7xlO~ 9 to 9xlO" 9
cm2 s~\ These results indicate that the measurements of S
and P v for individual cells are in good agreement with
earlier population measurements, even based upon the
relatively small number of cell trajectories analyzed here.
Further, the correspondence of the results from the two
models reinforces the theoretical basis of the correspondence between the models for individual cell movement
and movement of cell populations.
Chemotactic responsiveness
Estimation of the dimensionless chemotactic responsiveness, 8, was accomplished using computer simulation of
cell paths according to equations (A3) and (A4) (see
Appendix). Fig. 4 illustrates several cell paths for the
same white noise realization, showing the changes that
occur as the chemotactic responsiveness 8 is increased
exponentially from 0 to 3. The same noise realization was
used for all paths, so the calculations were identical except
for the value of <5. In order to obtain an average
chemotactic index, CI, for a given value of <5, simulations
were run for 100 cells for each 8, and the CI values
calculated for the 100 cell paths were averaged. The initial
direction of each cell was random. This was repeated three
times, giving three sets of 100 cells each for each 8. These
results are presented as a plot of CI versus log 8 in Fig. 5.
Superimposed on the plot are the values of CI generated
analytically from the relationship CI=^Va/S from the
population migration experiments of Stokes et al. (1990).
In those experiments, the maximum chemotactic response
a o =10- 10 M,
was
measured
when
with
Va=3.5x 10~16 M ;ian~\ which gave *=2600 cm2 s" 1 . Using
Sc=40 jjin h" 1 , which might be expected in the presence of
an angiogenic stimulus, CI=^Va/S=0.08 in those experiments in that gradient. The large open diamond in Fig. 5
represents that experimental datum. It is superimposed on
the simulations curve at the place where CI=0.08. The
gradient is substantially larger in our simulations,
Va=2xlO~ 14 M/mi~ 1 . For this Va value and again assuming S=40/imh~ 1 , the same chemotactic ability (same
X) in this larger gradient should give a CI=0.5 in the
simulations. This is represented by the large open square
in Fig. 5, superimposed on the simulations curve at the
point where CI=0.5. Reading off the corresponding value
for log <5, the simulations predict that values of 5=1.5
could be expected for comparable chemotactic ability as in
the aFGF experiments. Lower values of <5 are expected for
less than optimal attractant concentrations, and higher
values are not expected, on the basis of the experimental
426

C. L. Stokes et al.

o-

-5
Fig. 4. Example of the change in a simulated cell path as the
value of the dimensionless chemotactic responsiveness <5 was
varied from 0 to 3, as noted, for the same realization of the
noise process. The values on the axes are dimensionless, 2048
time steps were used, and the dimensionless duration of the
path is r=12. The cell started at the origin, shown by the filled
circle. The attractant source is centered at (0, 16.7), marked by
the encircled x. If the plot was made dimensional with
S=40/nnh~ 1 and P v =3h, the duration of the paths would be
36h and the attractant source would be centered at (0,2 mm).

measurements of x- With S=40 f.an h * <S= 1.5 corresponds
to values of ica0 of about 2400 fan h~ 2 . There is no
particular reason to specify a0 in the simulations to obtain
a value for K itself, so we only report the product xn0.
Discussion
A quantitative framework for analyzing the migration of
individual cells has been proposed, based on the stochastic
O-U process introduced for this problem by Dunn and
Brown (1987). In addition to using the continuous version
of the O-U process instead of the discrete version used by
Dunn and Brown, we have extended this framework to
include chemotaxis. In this model, random motility is
described as a combination of random fluctuations (quantitatively characterized by their variance, <r) and a
deterministic decay rate of current velocity (quantitatively characterized by the parameter P). Definitions of
speed, S, and persistence time in velocity, P v , were based
on the fundamental parameters a and /S. We must
emphasize that S and Pv contain the same motility
information as the pair a- and /3, simply written in a
different way. Thus, random motility is fully described by
only two parameters, the fundamental parameters a and
/3, or, equivalently, the defined parameters S and Pv. A
third term was added to the O-U process to account for the

l.U

i

•

•

1

•

1

•

•

"

•

1

•

•

•

•

1

"

•

•

•

1

0.8 0.6 -

u 0.4

_
A

0.2 0.0

_

-

A

.• o l

A

•

-

•
" 1

-1.5

.

.

I

I

1

-1.0

I

,

,

,

t

I

-0.5
log (6)

.

0.0

0.5

Fig. 5. Chemotactic index, CI, as a function of the
dimensionless chemotactic responsiveness, 6. Filled symbols
each represent the mean CI for 100 simulated cell paths for the
given 6. Large open symbols represent the CI calculated from
experimental data from cell populations as described in the
text. The large diamond represents the CI measured in the
small gradients present in the experiments, and the large
square represents the CI expected in the larger gradients used
in these simulations.

effects of a chemical gradient on the velocity of the cell.
This term is postulated to be proportional to the deviation
of current direction of cell movement from the steepest
gradient and to the attractant gradient magnitude (see
Fig. 1), and is characterized quantitatively by the chemotactic responsiveness parameter, K.
As shown by the match of the O-U process to data for
(D2) versus T(Fig. 3) for MEC random migration, the O-U
process appears to be an appropriate description of this
motility. We have pointed out that the agreement of the
MEC motility measurements and the model predictions in
terms of average properties is only the first level of
comparison on which to verify the applicability of a model.
The more detailed analysis of autocorrelations that Dunn
and Brown (1987) conducted on their data lends support to
the use of the O-U process to describe cell motility,
however, and could be applied to our data as well. That
work is beyond the scope of the present paper. The reason
such further analysis is desirable is because other forms of
stochastic equations can be formulated to describe cell
motility and chemotaxis (e.g. see Tranquillo and Lauffenburger, 1987) and some method is required to understand
which model is more representative of a given cell's
locomotion properties. The first level of distinguishing
among models is the average properties such as (JD2) as
we have demonstrated here, and the next level is the
statistical properties that can demonstrate whether
sequential movement steps are correlated in time and how
strongly. Use of autocorrelation structures also may be
required to relate observable quantities (e.g. S and Pv) to
motility mechanisms.
While quantities denned as speed and persistence time
have been measured previously (Glasgow et al. 1989;
Farrell etal. 1990; Vicker etal. 1986; Wilkinson etal. 1984;

Zigmond et al. 1985), the underlying stochastic framework
provided by the O-U process provides two advantages.
First, S and Pv are defined in terms of quantities (a-and p)
that are meant to describe the mechanisms of the motility.
While the actual mechanical or biochemical processes that
a and fi should represent are not presently denned, these
parameters provide a direct means of relating understandable and observable quantities (S and Pv) to basic motility
mechanisms. Possible mechanistic interpretations of <r
and /S are discussed below. Second, having the underlying
framework that describes the velocity process rather than
deriving S and P v from probabilities of moving and
turning (e.g. see Rivero et al. 1989) allows us to simulate
cell paths with the model that have the same average
properties as those measured experimentally. How to do so
is demonstrated in the Appendix in our estimation of the
chemotactic responsiveness *"(Fig. 4). This is very useful if
we desire to investigate the roles of motility in various
physiological processes. In fact, we have used this
migration model with the values of a, ft and K reported
herein in a simulation model of network formation in
angiogenesis to test our hypotheses about the roles of MEC
motility and chemotaxis in that process (Stokes and
Lauffenburger, 1991). It has also been used to analyze the
effects of macrophage chemotaxis on cell/target encounter
rates (Charnick et al. 1991). Measurements of parameters
defined in previous cell population and individual cell
models do not provide this ability.
Our results for MEC random migration reveal the
effects of several different environmental variables.
Without added chemical stimuli, MEC exhibited different
rates of movement when migrating with and without an
agarose overlay. Persistence time, in contrast, was the
same in both situations. In terms of the stochastic model
parameters, the magnitude of accelerations (a) was
greatly reduced by the overlay while the velocity decay
rate (/J) was unaffected. These results suggest that the
agarose overlay created a more difficult environment in
which to generate effective locomotory accelerations.
Results for MEC motility in culture medium were
somewhat surprising. Compared to the control, speed
increased by about 50 % while persistence time decreased
by 50 %. This means that the MEC moved more quickly
but also changed direction more often. This is the first time
that a simultaneous increase in speed has been accompanied by a decrease in persistence time in the reports
of several cell types in which these parameters have been
measured (Farrell et al. 1990; Glasgow et al. 1989; Vicker
et al. 1986; Wilkinson et al. 1984; Zigmond et al. 1985). One
consequence of this result may be interpreted using the
population random motility coefficient, n. We showed that
the value of /i increased in culture medium compared to
control. Since n is a measure of dispersion or 'area
coverage' of a migrating cell population, the result
indicates increased area coverage or spreading of a
population in the culture medium. This predicts the faster
growth of new vascular networks in such conditions
compared to that in control conditions. At the same time,
however, the opposing variations of a and (5 should yield
distinct network morphologies for stimulated versus
control conditions (see Stokes and Lauffenburger, 1991),
demonstrating the importance of the stochastic cell path
parameters.
For chemotaxis, the comparison of simulations to
experiment predict that the dimensionless chemotactic
responsiveness 8 (=wzo/S2) is about 1.5; d can be thought
of as a ratio of the chemotactic component of a cell's
Endothelial cell migration model

427

migration to its random motility component. With the
addition of a chemotactic factor, any increase in speed
would require a proportionally squared increase in KO,, to
provide the same relative contribution to the resulting
movement from chemotaxis. This predicts that increases
in cell speed without accompanying increases in chemotactic responsiveness are detrimental to the accomplishment
of covering distance up a chemical gradient. We must note
that we have not, to this point, demonstrated that the
functional form of the chemotactic component ty in
equation (4) is a valid description of MEC chemotactic
directional bias in gradients, but use it as a first
approximation.
The relationships between {a,p) and (SyPv) infer what
the velocity equation might represent in terms of the
mechanism of cell migration. Again, S and P v are simply
combinations of a and P and contain the same motility
information in a different form. For random motility
(when K=0), equation (2) indicates that certain experimental treatments might affect the parameters a (degree
of randomness) and /S (velocity decay rate constant)
independently of the other. In terms of observed speed
(S=Vn-//3) and persistence time CPv=l//S), however, some
treatments that affect a- should only affect cell speed, but
treatments that affect fi should affect both speed and
persistence time directly. All of data reported here are
consistent with this prediction. Our data for MEC
migrating in control (no agarose) and culture media
indicate that the addition of MEC growth factors increased
both a and (3. This means that while the decay rate of
current velocity increased (/? increased), the random
fluctuations also got much larger (a-increased). The latter
seems intuitively reasonable, since several chemical
factors (aFGF, serum, heparin) were added that could
stimulate the cells through receptor binding, adding
mechanistic steps at which random fluctuations might
occur. The decreased persistence time might then represent the faster rate of turnover of motile machinery or
transfer of signals throughout the cell caused by its
'stimulated state.' Comparing control experiments both
with and without agarose, only a changed, decreasing in
the presence of agarose overlay. This decrease indicates
less randomness at some step in the stimulus sensing or
response machinery. In other studies, Wilkinson et al.
(1984) have characterized a treatment of neutrophils that
affects cell speed but not the persistence time. Farrell et al.
(1990) have shown that certain concentrations of the
complement factor C5a increase both the speed and
persistence time of alveolar macrophages. All of these
measurements are consistent with the model, where both
S and Pv are affected (<r and /3 changing) or only S is
affected (only a changing). We are not aware of any
treatments of any cell type in which the persistence time
alone was affected by a chemical treatment, which would
contradict our model.
We can consider the molecular processes that might be
represented by a- and /S. The small and rapidly changing
fluctuations or random kicks represented by \/adW{t)
accumulate to determine the current motile state, or speed
and direction, of a cell described by the O-U process, a
determines the strength of these fluctuations, while /S
measures how quickly their effect on the motility fades
away. Dunn and Brown (1987) suggested that the
accumulation of the random fluctuations represents the
changes in the assembly of some component(s) of the
locomotory machinery. The parameter a would then
represent the strength of fluctuation while ft might
428

C. L. Stokes et al.

represent the rate of turnover of the assembled structures.
Alternatively or additionally, a could represent any or all
random fluctuations in the multi-step molecular mechanism determining cell motility. This could include fluctuations in rates of receptor-attractant binding on different
areas of the cell surface (stimulus sensing), fluctuations in
local concentration of attractant (stimulus), or fluctuations in transmission of signal between cell-surface
binding events and cytoskeletal motility machinery
events (stimulus transduction). For example, Tranquillo
and Lauffenburger (1987) have analyzed the effects of
random fluctuations in local attractant concentration on
cell motility behavior. $ would then be the integrative
process by which such fluctuations are damped out. Our
results suggest that migration in a confined space (under
agarose) decreases the effects of random fluctuations,
while addition of growth factors increases randomness and
the rate at which such randomness is dissipated within the
cell.
The chemotactic responsiveness K can be interpreted
similarly, K represents the ability of the cell to respond to a
perceived concentration gradient in its environment. The
assumption inherent in the model is that cells can
effectively sense spatial gradients (i.e. temporally changing chemical concentrations are not necessary, though the
cell's sensing mechanism may involve temporal aspects).
Thus, JC represents the ability of the cell to respond to a
differentia] signal across its length caused by a gradient of
bound cell-surface receptors. In a more sophisticated
treatment, K would not be a constant but would be some
function of the gradient of bound receptors and the
attractant concentration, to account for down-regulation
and saturation of cell surface receptors at high concentrations (similar to the treatment by Tranquillo et al.
(1988) of the chemotaxis coefficient, x>- This was not
attempted in this work because such functions are poorly
quantified in the endothelial cell in relation to cell motility
at this time.
To understand better the functional significance of cell
motility in tissue function, we can compare the values of S
and P v for MEC with those for other cell types. Glasgow et
al. (1988) and Farrell et al. (1990) have shown that typical
speeds and persistence times for guinea pig and rat
alveolar macrophages in response to chemotactic peptides
and C5a are 120 to 150 (jmh" 1 and 0.3 to 0.5 h,
respectively. These compare to our measurements of S=20
to 40/anh~ 1 and Pv<=3 to 6h for MEC. In population
migration experiments (and as calculated from speed and
persistence time), the random motility coefficients (/J)
measured for alveolar macrophages are around
10" 8 cm2 s" 1 (Glasgow et al. 1988; Farrell et al. 1990), very
similar to those for MEC (Rupnick et al. 1988; Stokes et al.
1990). Therefore, though the rate of dispersion of the
macrophages as characterized by /i is approximately the
same as that of MEC, the macrophage moves much
quicker than the MEC but also makes many more turns.
These differences appear to have a functional basis: the
function of the alveolar macrophage is to patrol the surface
of the lungs, scavenging for foreign particles, while the
moltility of endothelial cells is involved in the development of new capillaries and in the re-endothelialization of
denuded areas of larger vessels. For the macrophage, the
ability to cover a lot of area quite densely is probably of
more use in locating foreign particles, whereas the
endothelial cell involved in forming new blood vessels
should not turn too often or reasonable networks with
useful lengths of vessels might not be formed. For another

white blood cell, the neutrophil, speed and persistence
time are around 1200/xmh"1 and 0.25 h, respectively
(Zigmond et al. 1985). Their random motility coefficient is
in the range of 10~7 to 2xl0 6 cm 2 s~ 1 as measured in the
under-agarose assay in response to chemotactic peptides
(Tranqiiillo et al. 1988). This is one or two orders of
magnitude higher than that of MEC and alveolar
macrophages, indicating that the rate of dispersion of
neutrophils is significantly faster than that of MEC and
macrophages. This difference is likely to be important in
the inflammatory response, reflecting the time in which
neutrophils must respond to infectious agents in order to
contain them. The ability to make these comparisons and
infer cell-function relationships is possible because of the
quantitative nature of the parameters reported. In
particular, these parameters represent the intrinsic
motility behavior of the various cell types, and have the
advantage of not depending on extraneous aspects of the
assay system used to measure them.
In summary, we have proposed a mathematical model of
single cell random motility and chemotaxis that provides:
(1) a quantitative framework in which to assess these cell
functions, and (2) the ability mathematically to simulate
cell paths for use in mathematical models of physiological
processes in which cell migration is involved. We have
demonstrated that the continuous O-U process is an
appropriate model for MEC random motility at the level of
average properties, and have demonstrated how the
chemotactic sensitivity can be estimated from measurements of population migration. The use of quantitative
models to evaluate cell migration should provide an
objective basis upon which to evaluate mechanistic
relationships among underlying physiochemical properties, emergent motility properties, and the functional
significance of the motility in tissue organization and
function.
We thank Paul DiMilla for development work on the image
analysis system, Ralph Nossal for helpful discussions, and
gratefully acknowledge funding from NIH grant GM41476.

Pv; and for attractant concentration, it is the concentration
at the source ao. Thus we define new dimensionless
variables for velocity, position, time and attractant
concentration: V=v/S; X=x/SPv; r=t/Pv; and A=a/a0.
Recall that S=V(a/jS) and P v =l/j3. Substituting these
definitions into equations (2)-(4), the equations for
velocity and position in two dimensions become:
<5VAsin

4> dr

(Al)
(A2)

Jo

where
W' indicates the Weiner process in terms of the dimensionless time (i.e. m e a n = 0 , variance = | T | ) . Comparison of
equation (Al) with equation (2) reveals t h a t a threeparameter model (a, /3 and K) has been reduced to a oneparameter model (8). 8 is the only dimensionless parameter that emerged, and will be denned as the dimensionless chemotactic responsiveness. 8 can be thought of as a
comparison of the chemotactic bias or drift tendency, wxo,
with the random or dispersive tendency of the migration,
S2.
To simulate cell paths, equations (Al) and (A2) were
solved numerically (required by the random noise input,
W), using the stochastic Euler method (Mil'shtein, 1974;
Wright, 1974). With this method, the velocity and position
at the ith time step, V, and %„ are given by:

V, =

! - Ar) + 7v"(0,/i), + SVA,-! sin

AT

X, = £,_!+?,•_!*!;.

(A3)

(A4)

) indicates a Gaussian distributed random variable
with mean of zero and variance h, where h is equal to the
dimensionless time step size.
The method of solution is illustrated in Fig. Al. The
necessary time step size for convergence of the solution

Appendix
In order to simulate cell paths under chemotaxis conditions, an attractant gradient, Va, must be specified. We
used one plane of a three-dimensional spherical steadystate gradient created by a sphere (disk in two dimensions)
at concentration a,, with radius R (see Fig. 1, main text).
The attractant concentration, a(r,t), and the attractant
concentration gradient, Va(r,t), for this situation are
air^aji/r,
and Va(r,i)=-a o fl/r 2 , for r>R, with the
distance r measured from the source center. We use this
gradient for two reasons. First, it is plausibly relevant to
in vivo tissue angiogenesis situations (such as the rabbit
cornea assay (Auerbach et al. 1974) and the chick
chorioallantoic membrane assay (Gimbrone et al. 1974)).
Second, it yields a very simple and easily interpretable
form of the dimensionless chemotactic responsiveness, 8,
defined below. Any other gradient could have been chosen.
It is useful to make equations (2)-(4) dimensionless to
reveal characteristic parameter groupings. This is done by
scaling the variables (velocity, position, time and attractant concentration), or dividing each one by a value
characteristic of the motility system. A reasonable choice
for the characteristic value for velocity is speed, S; for
distance it is the distance travelled in one persistence time
(mean free path), or SPV; for time, it is the persistence time

Deterministic
part

Fig. Al. Method of solution of stochastic differential equation
in one dimension using the stochastic Euler method and Ito
calculus. A hypothetical realization of the white noise Wiener
process in one dimension, Wx, and the x-directed velocity, Vx,
are plotted versus dimensionless time, z. To obtain the value of
Vx at the 13 increment, one evaluates the deterministic part of
equation (A3) (Vr2(l-Ar)+<5VAT3sin|0r2/2|Ar) at ^ and adds
that to the present value of V^C^)- Then one adds the change
in the Wiener process (AWXiTs=N(0,h)) over the time increment
T3-T2 to obtain the final value of Vx at r3. This is repeated for
subsequent segments as shown.

Endothelial cell migration model

429

was determined following the procedure of Wright (1974).
At the ith time step, the deterministic terms of equation
(A4) (the first and third terms) are calculated. Then the
value of the random noise, ft(0,h)lt is added to the
deterministic part. The new position of the cell is
subsequently calculated from the velocity according to
equation (A4). This process is successively repeated to
obtain a realization of V and X for a given realization of
the noise process N{0,h), as illustrated in Fig. Al.
References
ALT, W. (1980). Biased random walk models for chemotaxia and related
diffusion approximations. J math. Biol. 9, 147-177.
AUERBACH, R., KUBAI, L., KNIGHTON, D. R. AND FOLKMAN, J. (1974) A

simple procedure for the long-term cultivation of chick embryos. Devi
Biol. 41, 391-394.
BROWN, A. F. AND DUNN, G. A. (1989). Microinterferometry of the

movement of dry matter in fibroblasts. J. Cell Sci. 92, 379-389.
CHABNICK, S., FISHER, E. S. AND LAUFFENBURGKR, D. A. (1991).

Computer simulations of the effect of chemotaxis on cell/target
encounters in two dimensions. Bull. math. Biol. (in press).
DOOB, J. L. (1942). The Brownian movement and stochastic equations.
Ann. Math. 43, 351-369.
DUNN, G. A. (1983). Characterizing a kinesiB response1 Time averaged
measures of cell speed and directional persistence. Agents Actions
Suppl. 12, 14-33
DUNN, G. A. AND BROWN, A. F. (1987). A unified approach to analyzing
cell motUity. J. Cell Sci. Suppl. 8, 81-102.
FARRELL, B E., LAUFFENBURGER, D. A AND DANIELS, R P. (1990).

Motile response of alveolar macrophages to C5a. Cell Motil. Cytoskel.
16, 279-293.
GIMBRONB, M. A. JR, COTRAN, R. S., LEAPMAN, S B. AND FOLKMAN, J.

(1974). Tumor growth and neovascularization: An experimental model
using the rabbit cornea. J. natn. Cancer Inst. 52, 413—427.
GLASGOW, J. E., FARRELL, B. E., FISHBR, E. S., LAUFFENBUHGER, D. A.

AND DANIELS, R. P. (1989). The motile response of alveolar
macrophages: An experimental study using single-cell and cell
population approaches. Am. Rev. resp. Dis. 139, 320-329.
INCE, C, YPEY, D. L., DIBSSELHOFF-DBN DULK, M. M. C., VISSER, J. A.

M., DEVOS, A. AND VAN FURTH, R. (1983) Micro-COrincubator for

use on a microscope. J. immun. Meth. 60, 269-275.
KELLER, E. F. AND SEGEL, L. A (1971). Model for chemotans J. theor.
Biol. 30, 225-234.
LAUFFENBUHGBR, D. A., FARRELL, B. E., TRANQUILLO, R. T., KISTLER, A.

AND ZIGMOND, S. (1988). Gradient perception by neutrophil leukocytes,
continued. J Cell Sci. 88, 415-416.
MIL'SHTEIN, G. N. (1974). Approximate integration of stochastic
differential equations. Theory Prob. Appl. 19, 567-562.
MCCUTCHEON, M. (1946) Chemotaxis in leukocytes. Phys. Rev. 28,
319-336.

430

C. L. Stokes et al.

NOSSAL, R. AND ZIGMOND, S. (1976). Chemotropism indices for
polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Biophys J. 16, 1171-1182.
OTHMER, H. G., DUNBAR, S. R. AND ALT, W. (1988). Models of dispersal
in biological systems. J. math. Biol. 28, 263-298.
RTVSRO, M. A., LAUFFENBURQER, D. A., TRANQUILLO, R. T. AND

BUETTNER, H. M. (1989). Transport models for chemotactic cell
populations based on individual cell behavior. Chem. Engng Sci. 44,
2881-2897.
RUPNICK, M. A., STOKES, C. L., WILLIAMS, S. K. AND LAUFFENBURGER, D.

A. (1988). Quantitative analysis of human microvessel endothelial
cells using a linear under-agarose assay. Lab. Invest. 59, 363-372.
STOKES, C. L. AND LAUFFENBURGER, D. A. (1991). Analysis of the roles of
endothelial cell motility and chemotaxis in angiogenesis. J. theor.
Biol. (in press).
STOKES, C. L., RUPNICK, M. A , WILLIAMS, S. K. AND LAUFFENBURQER, D.

A. (1990). Chemotaxis of human microvessel endothelial cells in
response to acidic fibroblast growth factor. Lab. Invest. 63, 657-668.
THORNTON, S., MUELLER, S. AND LEVINS, E. (1983). Human endothelial

cells. Cloning and long-term serial cultivation employing heparin.
Science 222, 623-625.
TRANQUILLO, R. T. AND LAUFFENBURGER, D. A. (1987). Analysis of

leukocyte chemosensory movement Adv. Biosci. 66, 29-38.
TRANQUILLO, R. T., ZIGMOND, S. H. AND LAUFFENBUROER, D. A. (1988).

Measurement of the chemotaxis coefficient for human neutrophils in
the under-agarose migration assay. Cell Motil. Cytoskel. 11, 1-15.
UHLENBECK, G. E. AND ORNSTEIN, L. S. (1930). On the theory of

Brownian motion. Phys. Rev. 36, 823-841.
VICKKR, M. G., LACKIB, J. M. AND SCHILL, W. (1986). Neutrophil

leukocyte chemotaxis is not induced by a spatial gradient of
chemoattractant. J. Cell Sci. 84, 263-280.
WAGNER, R. AND MATTHEWS, M. (1975). The isolation and culture of
capillary endothelium from epididymal fat. Microvasc. Res. 10,
286-297.
WILKINSON, P. C., LACKIE, J. M., FORRESTER, J. V. AND DUNN, G. A.

(1984). Chemokinetic accumulation of human neutrophils on immunecomplex-coated substrata: analysis at a boundary. J. Cell Biol. 99,
1761-1768.
WILLIAMS, S. K. (1987). Isolation and culture of microvessel and largevessel endothelial cells: their use in transport and clinical studies. In
Microvascular Perfusion and Transport in Health and Disease (ed. P.
McDonagh), pp. 204-245. Karger, Basel.
WRIGHT, D. J. (1974). The digital simulation of stochastic differential
equations. IEEE Trans. Automat. Control 19, 75-76.
ZIGMOND, S. H., KLAUSNER, R. D., TRANQUILLO, R. AND LAUFFENBURGER,

D. A. (1985). Analysis of the requirements for time-averaging of the
receptor occupancy for gradient detection by polymorphonuclear
leukocytes. In Membrane Receptors and Cellular Regulation, UCLA
Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology, New Series, vol. 23 (ed
M. P. Czech and C. R. Kahn), pp. 347-356. Alan R. Liss, New York.

(Received 29 November 1990 - Accepted 28 February 1991)

